<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-8-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, blood and thunder! and oh, blood and wounds!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These are but vulgar oaths, as you may deem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too gentle reader! and most shocking sounds:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so they are; yet thus is Glory’s dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unriddled, and as my true Muse expounds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At present such things, since they are her theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So be they her inspirers! Call them Mars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bellona, what you will⁠—they mean but wars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All was prepared⁠—the fire, the sword, the men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wield them in their terrible array⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The army, like a lion from his den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marched forth with nerve and sinews bent to slay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A human Hydra, issuing from its fen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To breathe destruction on its winding way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose heads were heroes, which cut off in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Immediately in others grew again.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>History can only take things in the gross;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could we know them in detail, perchance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In balancing the profit and the loss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">War’s merit it by no means might enhance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To waste so much gold for a little dross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As hath been done, mere conquest to advance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drying up a single tear has more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of honest fame, than shedding seas of gore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And why?⁠—because it brings self-approbation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereas the other, after all its glare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shouts, bridges, arches, pensions from a nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which (it may be) has not much left to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A higher title, or a loftier station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though they may make Corruption gape or stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, in the end, except in Freedom’s battles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are nothing but a child of Murder’s rattles.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And such they are⁠—and such they will be found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not so Leonidas and Washington,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose every battle-field is holy ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which breathes of nations saved, not worlds undone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sweetly on the ear such echoes sound!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While the mere victor’s may appal or stun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The servile and the vain⁠—such names will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A watchword till the Future shall be free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The night was dark, and the thick mist allowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought to be seen save the artillery’s flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which arched the horizon like a fiery cloud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the Danube’s waters shone the same⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-646" id="noteref-646" epub:type="noteref">646</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mirrored Hell! the volleying roar, and loud</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long booming of each peal on peal, o’ercame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ear far more than thunder; for Heaven’s flashes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spare, or smite rarely⁠—Man’s make millions ashes!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The column ordered on the assault scarce passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the Russian batteries a few toises,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When up the bristling Moslem rose at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Answering the Christian thunders with like voices:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then one vast fire, air, earth, and stream embraced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rocked as ’t were beneath the mighty noises;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the whole rampart blazed like Etna, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The restless Titan hiccups in his den;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-647" id="noteref-647" epub:type="noteref">647</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And one enormous shout of “Allah!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-648" id="noteref-648" epub:type="noteref">648</a> rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the same moment, loud as even the roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of War’s most mortal engines, to their foes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hurling defiance: city, stream, and shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resounded “Allah!” and the clouds which close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With thickening canopy the conflict o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vibrate to the Eternal name. Hark! through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All sounds it pierceth⁠—“Allah! Allah Hu!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-649" id="noteref-649" epub:type="noteref">649</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The columns were in movement one and all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of the portion which attacked by water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thicker than leaves the lives began to fall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-650" id="noteref-650" epub:type="noteref">650</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though led by Arseniew, that great son of slaughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As brave as ever faced both bomb and ball.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Carnage” (so Wordsworth tells you) “is God’s daughter:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-651" id="noteref-651" epub:type="noteref">651</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If <i>he</i> speak truth, she is Christ’s sister, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just now behaved as in the Holy Land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Prince de Ligne was wounded in the knee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Count Chapeau-Bras,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-652" id="noteref-652" epub:type="noteref">652</a>⁠—too, had a ball between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His cap and head,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-653" id="noteref-653" epub:type="noteref">653</a> which proves the head to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aristocratic as was ever seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it then received no injury</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than the cap; in fact, the ball could mean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No harm unto a right legitimate head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Ashes to ashes”⁠—why not lead to lead?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Also the General Markow, Brigadier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insisting on removal of <i>the Prince</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst some groaning thousands dying near⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All common fellows, who might writhe and wince,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shriek for water into a deaf ear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The General Markow, who could thus evince</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sympathy for rank, by the same token,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To teach him greater, had his own leg broken.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-654" id="noteref-654" epub:type="noteref">654</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Three hundred cannon threw up their emetic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thirty thousand muskets flung their pills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like hail, to make a bloody Diuretic.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-655" id="noteref-655" epub:type="noteref">655</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mortality! thou hast thy monthly bills:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy plagues⁠—thy famines⁠—thy physicians⁠—yet tick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the death-watch, within our ears the ills</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past, present, and to come;⁠—but all may yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the true portrait of one battle-field;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There the still varying pangs, which multiply</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until their very number makes men hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the infinities of agony,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which meet the gaze, whate’er it may regard⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The groan, the roll in dust, the all-<i>white</i> eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned back within its socket⁠—these reward</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your rank and file by thousands, while the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May win perhaps a riband at the breast!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet I love Glory;⁠—Glory’s a great thing:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Think what it is to be in your old age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Maintained at the expense of your good King:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moderate pension shakes full many a sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Heroes are but made for bards to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is still better⁠—thus, in verse, to wage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your wars eternally, besides enjoying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half-pay for life, make Mankind worth destroying.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The troops, already disembarked, pushed on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take a battery on the right: the others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who landed lower down, their landing done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had set to work as briskly as their brothers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being grenadiers, they mounted one by one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cheerful as children climb the breasts of mothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the intrenchment and the palisade,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-656" id="noteref-656" epub:type="noteref">656</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite orderly, as if upon parade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And this was admirable: for so hot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fire was, that were red Vesuvius loaded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides its lava, with all sorts of shot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shells or hells, it could not more have goaded.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of officers a third fell on the spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing which Victory by no means boded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gentlemen engaged in the assault:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hounds, when the huntsman tumbles, are at fault.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But here I leave the general concern</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To track our Hero on his path of Fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He must his laurels separately earn⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fifty thousand heroes, name by name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though all deserving equally to turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A couplet, or an elegy to claim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would form a lengthy lexicon of Glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, what is worse still, a much longer story:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore we must give the greater number</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the Gazette⁠—which doubtless fairly dealt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the deceased, who lie in famous slumber</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ditches, fields, or wheresoe’er they felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their clay for the last time their souls encumber;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrice happy he whose name has been well spelt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the despatch: I knew a man whose loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was printed <i>Grove</i>, although his name was Grose.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-657" id="noteref-657" epub:type="noteref">657</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan and Johnson joined a certain corps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fought away with might and main, not knowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The way which they had never trod before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still less guessing where they might be going;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But on they marched, dead bodies trampling o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Firing, and thrusting, slashing, sweating, glowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fighting thoughtlessly enough to win,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To their <i>two</i> selves, <i>one</i> whole bright bulletin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus on they wallowed in the bloody mire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dead and dying thousands⁠—sometimes gaining</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A yard or two of ground, which brought them nigher</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To some odd angle for which all were straining;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At other times, repulsed by the close fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which really poured as if all Hell were raining</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of Heaven, they stumbled backwards o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wounded comrade, sprawling in his gore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though ’t was Don Juan’s first of fields, and though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The nightly muster and the silent march</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the chill dark, when Courage does not glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much as under a triumphal arch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps might make him shiver, yawn, or throw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A glance on the dull clouds (as thick as starch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which stiffened Heaven) as if he wished for day;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet for all this he did not run away.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Indeed he could not. But what if he had?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There <i>have been</i> and <i>are</i> heroes who begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With something not much better, or as bad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Frederick the Great from Molwitz<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-658" id="noteref-658" epub:type="noteref">658</a> deigned to run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first and last time; for, like a pad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hawk, or bride, most mortals after one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warm bout are broken in to their new tricks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fight like fiends for pay or politics.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was what Erin calls, in her sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Old Erse or Irish, or it may be <i>Punic</i>;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The antiquarians<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-659" id="noteref-659" epub:type="noteref">659</a>⁠—who can settle Time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which settles all things, Roman, Greek, or Runic⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swear that Pat’s language sprung from the same clime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Hannibal, and wears the Tyrian tunic</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dido’s alphabet⁠—and this is rational</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any other notion, and not national;)⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan was quite “a broth of a boy,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing of impulse and a child of song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now swimming in the sentiment of joy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the <i>sensation</i> (if that phrase seem wrong),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterward, if he must needs destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such good company as always throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To battles, sieges, and that kind of pleasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No less delighted to employ his leisure;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But always without malice: if he warred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or loved, it was with what we call “the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intentions,” which form all Mankind’s <i>trump card</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be produced when brought up to the test.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The statesman⁠—hero⁠—harlot⁠—lawyer⁠—ward</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Off each attack, when people are in quest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their designs, by saying they <i>meant well</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is pity “that such meaning should pave Hell.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-660" id="noteref-660" epub:type="noteref">660</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I almost lately have begun to doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether Hell’s pavement⁠—if it be so <i>paved</i>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must not have latterly been quite worn out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not by the numbers good intent hath saved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by the mass who go below without</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those ancient good intentions, which once shaved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And smoothed the brimstone of that street of Hell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bears the greatest likeness to Pall Mall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-661" id="noteref-661" epub:type="noteref">661</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, by some strange chance, which oft divides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Warrior from warrior in their grim career,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like chastest wives from constant husbands’ sides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just at the close of the first bridal year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By one of those odd turns of Fortune’s tides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was on a sudden rather puzzled here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, after a good deal of heavy firing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found himself alone, and friends retiring.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I don’t know how the thing occurred⁠—it might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be that the greater part were killed or wounded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that the rest had faced unto the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About; a circumstance which has confounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cæsar himself, who, in the very sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his whole army, which so much abounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In courage, was obliged to snatch a shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rally back his Romans to the field.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-662" id="noteref-662" epub:type="noteref">662</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, who had no shield to snatch, and was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No Cæsar, but a fine young lad, who fought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew not why, arriving at this pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stopped for a minute, as perhaps he ought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a much longer time; then, like an ass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Start not, kind reader, since great Homer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-663" id="noteref-663" epub:type="noteref">663</a> thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This simile enough for Ajax, Juan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps may find it better than a new one);</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, like an ass, he went upon his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, what was stranger, never looked behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But seeing, flashing forward, like the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the hills, a fire enough to blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who dislike to look upon a fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stumbled on, to try if he could find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A path, to add his own slight arm and forces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To corps, the greater part of which were corses.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perceiving then no more the commandant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his own corps, nor even the corps, which had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite disappeared⁠—the gods know how! (I can’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Account for everything which may look bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In history; but we at least may grant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was not marvellous that a mere lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In search of Glory, should look on before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor care a pinch of snuff about his corps:)⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-664" id="noteref-664" epub:type="noteref">664</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perceiving nor commander nor commanded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left at large, like a young heir, to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His way to⁠—where he knew not⁠—single handed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As travellers follow over bog and brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An “ignis fatuus;” or as sailors stranded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the nearest hut themselves betake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Juan, following Honour and his nose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rushed where the thickest fire announced most foes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-665" id="noteref-665" epub:type="noteref">665</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He knew not where he was, nor greatly cared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he was dizzy, busy, and his veins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Filled as with lightning⁠—for his spirit shared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hour, as is the case with lively brains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where the hottest fire was seen and heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the loud cannon pealed his hoarsest strains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He rushed, while earth and air were sadly shaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By thy humane discovery, Friar Bacon!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-666" id="noteref-666" epub:type="noteref">666</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-667" id="noteref-667" epub:type="noteref">667</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And as he rushed along, it came to pass he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell in with what was late the second column,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under the orders of the General Lascy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now reduced, as is a bulky volume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into an elegant extract (much less massy)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of heroism, and took his place with solemn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Air ’midst the rest, who kept their valiant faces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And levelled weapons still against the Glacis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-668" id="noteref-668" epub:type="noteref">668</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Just at this crisis up came Johnson too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who had “retreated,” as the phrase is when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men run away much rather than go through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Destruction’s jaws into the Devil’s den;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Johnson was a clever fellow, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knew when and how “to cut and come again,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never ran away, except when running</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was nothing but a valorous kind of cunning.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And so, when all his corps were dead or dying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except Don Juan, a mere novice, whose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More virgin valour never dreamt of flying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From ignorance of danger, which indues</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its votaries, like Innocence relying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On its own strength, with careless nerves and thews⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Johnson retired a little, just to rally</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who catch cold in “shadows of Death’s valley.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And there, a little sheltered from the shot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which rained from bastion, battery, parapet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rampart, wall, casement, house⁠—for there was not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this extensive city, sore beset</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Christian soldiery, a single spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which did not combat like the Devil, as yet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found a number of Chasseurs, all scattered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the resistance of the chase they battered.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And these he called on; and, what ’s strange, they came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto his call, unlike “the spirits from</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vasty deep,” to whom you may exclaim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Says Hotspur, long ere they will leave their home:⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-669" id="noteref-669" epub:type="noteref">669</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their reasons were uncertainty, or shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At shrinking from a bullet or a bomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that odd impulse, which in wars or creeds<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-670" id="noteref-670" epub:type="noteref">670</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes men, like cattle, follow him who leads.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By Jove! he was a noble fellow, Johnson,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though his name, than Ajax or Achilles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sounds less harmonious, underneath the sun soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We shall not see his likeness: he could kill his</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man quite as quietly as blows the Monsoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her steady breath (which some months the same <i>still</i> is):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seldom he varied feature, hue, or muscle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And could be very busy without bustle;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore, when he ran away, he did so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon reflection, knowing that behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would find others who would fain be rid so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of idle apprehensions, which like wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trouble heroic stomachs. Though their lids so</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft are soon closed, all heroes are not blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when they light upon immediate death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retire a little, merely to take breath.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Johnson only ran off, to return</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many other warriors, as we said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto that rather somewhat misty bourne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Hamlet tells us is a pass of dread.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-671" id="noteref-671" epub:type="noteref">671</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Jack, howe’er, this gave but slight concern:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His soul (like galvanism upon the dead)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Acted upon the living as on wire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And led them back into the heaviest fire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Egad! they found the second time what they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first time thought quite terrible enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fly from, malgré all which people say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Glory, and all that immortal stuff</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which fills a regiment (besides their pay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That daily shilling which makes warriors tough)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They found on their return the self-same welcome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which made some <i>think</i>, and others <i>know</i>, a <i>hell</i> come.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They fell as thick as harvests beneath hail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grass before scythes, or corn below the sickle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proving that trite old truth, that Life’s as frail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any other boon for which men stickle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Turkish batteries thrashed them like a flail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or a good boxer, into a sad pickle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Putting the very bravest, who were knocked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the head before their guns were cocked.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Turks behind the traverses and flanks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the next bastion, fired away like devils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swept, as gales sweep foam away, whole ranks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However, Heaven knows how, the Fate who levels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Towns⁠—nations⁠—worlds, in her revolving pranks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So ordered it, amidst these sulphury revels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Johnson, and some few who had not scampered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reached the interior “talus”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-672" id="noteref-672" epub:type="noteref">672</a> of the rampart.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-673" id="noteref-673" epub:type="noteref">673</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>First one or two, then five, six, and a dozen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Came mounting quickly up, for it was now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All neck or nothing, as, like pitch or rosin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flame was showered forth above, as well ’s below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that you scarce could say who best had chosen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentlemen that were the first to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their martial faces on the parapet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or those who thought it brave to wait as yet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But those who scaled, found out that their advance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was favoured by an accident or blunder:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greek or Turkish Cohorn’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-674" id="noteref-674" epub:type="noteref">674</a> ignorance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had pallisadoed in a way you’d wonder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see in forts of Netherlands or France⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Though these to our Gibraltar must knock under)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Right in the middle of the parapet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just named, these palisades were primly set:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-675" id="noteref-675" epub:type="noteref">675</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So that on either side some nine or ten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Paces were left, whereon you could contrive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To march; a great convenience to our men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least to all those who were left alive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who thus could form a line and fight again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that which farther aided them to strive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was, that they could kick down the palisades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which scarcely rose much higher than grass blades.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-676" id="noteref-676" epub:type="noteref">676</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Among the first⁠—I will not say <i>the first</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such precedence upon such occasions</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will oftentimes make deadly quarrels burst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out between friends as well as allied nations:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Briton must be bold who really durst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Put to such trial John Bull’s partial patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As say that Wellington at Waterloo</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was beaten⁠—though the Prussians say so too;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And that if Blucher, Bulow, Gneisenau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And God knows who besides in “au” and “ow,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not come up in time to cast an awe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-677" id="noteref-677" epub:type="noteref">677</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the hearts of those who fought till now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As tigers combat with an empty craw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Duke of Wellington had ceased to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Orders⁠—also to receive his pensions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which are the heaviest that our history mentions.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But never mind;⁠—“God save the King!” and <i>Kings!</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if <i>he</i> don’t, I doubt if <i>men</i> will longer⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think I hear a little bird, who sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The people by and by will be the stronger:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The veriest jade will wince whose harness wrings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much into the raw as quite to wrong her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the rules of posting⁠—and the mob</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last fall sick of imitating Job.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At first it grumbles, then it swears, and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like David, flings smooth pebbles ’gainst a Giant;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last it takes to weapons such as men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snatch when Despair makes human hearts less pliant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then comes “the tug of war;”⁠—‘t will come again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I rather doubt; and I would fain say “fie on ’t,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I had not perceived that Revolution</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alone can save the earth from Hell’s pollution.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to continue:⁠—I say not <i>the</i> first,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of the first, our little friend Don Juan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walked o’er the walls of Ismail, as if nursed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst such scenes⁠—though this was quite a new one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him, and I should hope to <i>most</i>. The thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Glory, which so pierces through and through one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pervaded him⁠—although a generous creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As warm in heart as feminine in feature.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-678" id="noteref-678" epub:type="noteref">678</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And here he was⁠—who upon Woman’s breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even from a child, felt like a child; howe’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Man in all the rest might be confessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To him it was Elysium to be there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he could even withstand that awkward test</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Rousseau points out to the dubious fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Observe your lover when he <i>leaves</i> your arms;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Juan never <i>left</i> them⁠—while they had charms,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Unless compelled by Fate, or wave, or wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or near relations⁠—who are much the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <i>here</i> he was!⁠—where each tie that can bind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Humanity must yield to steel and flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <i>he</i> whose very body was all mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flung here by Fate or Circumstance, which tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loftiest, hurried by the time and place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dashed on like a spurred blood-horse in a race.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So was his blood stirred while he found resistance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As is the hunter’s at the five-bar gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or double post and rail, where the existence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Britain’s youth depends upon their weight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lightest being the safest: at a distance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hated cruelty, as all men hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blood, until heated⁠—and even then his own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At times would curdle o’er some heavy groan.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The General Lascy, who had been hard pressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeing arrive an aid so opportune</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As were some hundred youngsters all abreast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who came as if just dropped down from the moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Juan, who was nearest him, addressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His thanks, and hopes to take the city soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not reckoning him to be a “base Bezonian”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-679" id="noteref-679" epub:type="noteref">679</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As Pistol calls it), but a young Livonian.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-680" id="noteref-680" epub:type="noteref">680</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, to whom he spoke in German, knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As much of German as of Sanscrit, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In answer made an inclination to</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The General who held him in command;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For seeing one with ribands, black and blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stars, medals, and a bloody sword in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Addressing him in tones which seemed to thank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He recognised an officer of rank.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Short speeches pass between two men who speak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No common language; and besides, in time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of war and taking towns, when many a shriek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rings o’er the dialogue, and many a crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is perpetrated ere a word can break</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the ear, and sounds of horror chime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In like church-bells, with sigh, howl, groan, yell, prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There cannot be much conversation there.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore all we have related in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two long octaves, passed in a little minute;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the same small minute, every sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contrived to get itself comprised within it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very cannon, deafened by the din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew dumb, for you might almost hear a linnet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as thunder, ’midst the general noise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Human Nature’s agonizing voice!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The town was entered. Oh Eternity!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“God made the country, and man made the town,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Cowper says<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-681" id="noteref-681" epub:type="noteref">681</a>⁠—and I begin to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his opinion, when I see cast down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rome⁠—Babylon-Tyre-Carthage⁠—Nineveh⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All walls men know, and many never known;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pondering on the present and the past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deem the woods shall be our home at last:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of all men, saving Sylla,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-682" id="noteref-682" epub:type="noteref">682</a> the man-slayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who passes for in life and death most lucky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the great names which in our faces stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The General Boon, back-woodsman of Kentucky,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-683" id="noteref-683" epub:type="noteref">683</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was happiest amongst mortals anywhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For killing nothing but a bear or buck, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enjoyed the lonely, vigorous, harmless days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his old age in wilds of deepest maze.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Crime came not near him⁠—she is not the child</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of solitude; Health shrank not from him⁠—for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her home is in the rarely trodden wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where if men seek her not, and death be more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their choice than life, forgive them, as beguiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By habit to what their own hearts abhor⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In cities caged. The present case in point I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cite is, that Boon lived hunting up to ninety;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, what’s still stranger, left behind a name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which men vainly decimate the throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only famous, but of that <i>good</i> fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without which Glory’s but a tavern song⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Simple, serene, the <i>antipodes</i> of Shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Hate nor Envy e’er could tinge with wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An active hermit, even in age the child</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nature⁠—or the Man of Ross<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-684" id="noteref-684" epub:type="noteref">684</a> run wild.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘T is true he shrank from men even of his nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they built up unto his darling trees⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He moved some hundred miles off, for a station</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where there were fewer houses and more ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The inconvenience of civilisation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is, that you neither can be pleased nor please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But where he met the individual man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He showed himself as kind as mortal can.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was not all alone: around him grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sylvan tribe of children of the chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose young, unwakened world was ever new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor sword nor sorrow yet had left a trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her unwrinkled brow, nor could you view</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A frown on Nature’s or on human face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The free-born forest found and kept them free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fresh as is a torrent or a tree.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And tall, and strong, and swift of foot were they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the dwarfing city’s pale abortions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because their thoughts had never been the prey</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of care or gain: the green woods were their portions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sinking spirits told them they grew grey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No fashion made them apes of her distortions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Simple they were, not savage⁠—and their rifles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though very true, were not yet used for trifles.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Motion was in their days, Rest in their slumbers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Cheerfulness the handmaid of their toil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor yet too many nor too few their numbers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corruption could not make their hearts her soil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lust which stings, the splendour which encumbers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the free foresters divide no spoil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serene, not sullen, were the solitudes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this unsighing people of the woods.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So much for Nature:⁠—by way of variety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now back to thy great joys, Civilisation!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sweet consequence of large society,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">War⁠—pestilence⁠—the despot’s desolation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kingly scourge, the lust of notoriety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The millions slain by soldiers for their ration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scenes like Catherine’s boudoir at threescore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-685" id="noteref-685" epub:type="noteref">685</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Ismail’s storm to soften it the more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The town was entered: first one column made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its sanguinary way good⁠—then another;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The reeking bayonet and the flashing blade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Clashed ’gainst the scimitar, and babe and mother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With distant shrieks were heard Heaven to upbraid:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still closer sulphury clouds began to smother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breath of morn and man, where foot by foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The maddened Turks their city still dispute.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Koutousow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-686" id="noteref-686" epub:type="noteref">686</a> he who afterwards beat back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(With some assistance from the frost and snow)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Napoleon on his bold and bloody track,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It happened was himself beat back just now:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was a jolly fellow, and could crack</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His jest alike in face of friend or foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Life, and Death, and Victory were at stake;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-687" id="noteref-687" epub:type="noteref">687</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here it seemed his jokes had ceased to take:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For having thrown himself into a ditch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Followed in haste by various grenadiers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose blood the puddle greatly did enrich,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He climbed to where the parapet appears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there his project reached its utmost pitch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(‘Mongst other deaths the General Ribaupierre’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was much regretted), for the Moslem men</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Threw them all down into the ditch again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-688" id="noteref-688" epub:type="noteref">688</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And had it not been for some stray troops landing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They knew not where, being carried by the stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some spot, where they lost their understanding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wandered up and down as in a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until they reached, as daybreak was expanding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which a portal to their eyes did seem⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great and gay Koutousow might have lain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where three parts of his column yet remain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-689" id="noteref-689" epub:type="noteref">689</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And scrambling round the rampart, these same troops,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the taking of the “Cavalier,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-690" id="noteref-690" epub:type="noteref">690</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as Koutousow’s most “forlorn” of “hopes”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Took, like chameleons, some slight tinge of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opened the gate called “Kilia,” to the groups<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-691" id="noteref-691" epub:type="noteref">691</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of baffled heroes, who stood shyly near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sliding knee-deep in lately frozen mud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now thawed into a marsh of human blood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Kozacks, or, if so you please, Cossacques⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I don’t much pique myself upon orthography,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I do not grossly err in facts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Statistics, tactics, politics, and geography)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having been used to serve on horses’ backs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And no great dilettanti in topography</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fortresses, but fighting where it pleases</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their chiefs to order⁠—were all cut to pieces.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-692" id="noteref-692" epub:type="noteref">692</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their column, though the Turkish batteries thundered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon them, ne’ertheless had reached the rampart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-693" id="noteref-693" epub:type="noteref">693</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And naturally thought they could have plundered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The city, without being farther hampered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as it happens to brave men, they blundered⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Turks at first pretended to have scampered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to draw them ’twixt two bastion corners,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-694" id="noteref-694" epub:type="noteref">694</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whence they sallied on those Christian scorners.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then being taken by the tail⁠—a taking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fatal to bishops as to soldiers⁠—these<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-695" id="noteref-695" epub:type="noteref">695</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cossacques were all cut off as day was breaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And found their lives were let at a short lease⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But perished without shivering or shaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaving as ladders their heaped carcasses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er which Lieutenant-Colonel Yesouskoi</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marched with the brave battalion of Polouzki:⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-696" id="noteref-696" epub:type="noteref">696</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This valiant man killed all the Turks he met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could not eat them, being in his turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slain by some Mussulmans,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-697" id="noteref-697" epub:type="noteref">697</a> who would not yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without resistance, see their city burn.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The walls were won, but ’t was an even bet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which of the armies would have cause to mourn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T was blow for blow, disputing inch by inch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one would not retreat, nor ’t other flinch.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Another column also suffered much:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here we may remark with the historian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You should but give few cartridges to such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Troops as are meant to march with greatest glory on:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When matters must be carried by the touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the bright bayonet, and they all should hurry on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They sometimes, with a hankering for existence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Keep merely firing at a foolish distance.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-698" id="noteref-698" epub:type="noteref">698</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A junction of the General Meknop’s men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Without the General, who had fallen some time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before, being badly seconded just then)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was made at length with those who dared to climb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death-disgorging rampart once again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, though the Turk’s resistance was sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They took the bastion, which the Seraskier</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Defended at a price extremely dear.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-699" id="noteref-699" epub:type="noteref">699</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan and Johnson, and some volunteers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the foremost, offered him good quarter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A word which little suits with Seraskiers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or at least suited not this valiant Tartar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He died, deserving well his country’s tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A savage sort of military martyr:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An English naval officer, who wished</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make him prisoner, was also dished:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For all the answer to his proposition</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was from a pistol-shot that laid him dead;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-700" id="noteref-700" epub:type="noteref">700</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which the rest, without more intermission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to lay about with steel and lead⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pious metals most in requisition</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On such occasions: not a single head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was spared;⁠—three thousand Moslems perished here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sixteen bayonets pierced the Seraskier.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-701" id="noteref-701" epub:type="noteref">701</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The city’s taken⁠—only part by part⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Death is drunk with gore: there’s not a street</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where fights not to the last some desperate heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For those for whom it soon shall cease to beat.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-702" id="noteref-702" epub:type="noteref">702</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here War forgot his own destructive art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In more destroying Nature; and the heat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Carnage, like the Nile’s sun-sodden slime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engendered monstrous shapes of every crime.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A Russian officer, in martial tread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over a heap of bodies, felt his heel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seized fast, as if ’t were by the serpent’s head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose fangs Eve taught her human seed to feel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain he kicked, and swore, and writhed, and bled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And howled for help as wolves do for a meal⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The teeth still kept their gratifying hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As do the subtle snakes described of old.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-703" id="noteref-703" epub:type="noteref">703</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A dying Moslem, who had felt the foot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a foe o’er him, snatched at it, and bit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very tendon which is most acute⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That which some ancient Muse or modern wit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Named after thee, Achilles!) and quite through’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He made the teeth meet, nor relinquished it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even with his life⁠—for (but they lie) ’t is said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the live leg still clung the severed head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>However this may be, ’t is pretty sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Russian officer for life was lamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the Turk’s teeth stuck faster than a skewer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left him ’midst the invalid and maimed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The regimental surgeon could not cure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His patient, and, perhaps, was to be blamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than the head of the inveterate foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which was cut off, and scarce even then let go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But then the fact’s a fact⁠—and ’t is the part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a true poet to escape from fiction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whene’er he can; for there is little art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">in leaving verse more free from the restriction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Truth than prose, unless to suit the mart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For what is sometimes called poetic diction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that outrageous appetite for lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Satan angles with for souls, like flies.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-704" id="noteref-704" epub:type="noteref">704</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The city’s taken, but not rendered!⁠—No!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There’s not a Moslem that hath yielded sword:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood may gush out, as the Danube’s flow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rolls by the city wall; but deed nor word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Acknowledge aught of dread of Death or foe:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vain the yell of victory is roared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the advancing Muscovite⁠—the groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the last foe is echoed by his own.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The bayonet pierces and the sabre cleaves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And human lives are lavished everywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the year closing whirls the scarlet leaves<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-705" id="noteref-705" epub:type="noteref">705</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When the stripped forest bows to the bleak air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And groans; and thus the peopled city grieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shorn of its best and loveliest, and left bare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still it falls in vast and awful splinters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As oaks blown down with all their thousand winters.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is an awful topic⁠—but ’t is not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My cue for any time to be terrific:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For checkered as is seen our human lot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With good, and bad, and worse, alike prolific</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of melancholy merriment, to quote</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too much of one sort would be soporific;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without, or with, offence to friends or foes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I sketch your world exactly as it goes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And one good action in the midst of crimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is “quite refreshing,” in the affected phrase<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-706" id="noteref-706" epub:type="noteref">706</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these ambrosial, Pharisaic times,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all their pretty milk-and-water ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And may serve therefore to bedew these rhymes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little scorched at present with the blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conquest and its consequences, which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make Epic poesy so rare and rich.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Upon a taken bastion, where there lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thousands of slaughtered men, a yet warm group</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of murdered women, who had found their way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this vain refuge, made the good heart droop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shudder;⁠—while, as beautiful as May,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A female child of ten years tried to stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hide her little palpitating breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst the bodies lulled in bloody rest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-707" id="noteref-707" epub:type="noteref">707</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Two villanous Cossacques pursued the child</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With flashing eyes and weapons: matched with <i>them</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rudest brute that roams Siberia’s wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has feelings pure and polished as a gem⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bear is civilised, the wolf is mild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whom for this at last must we condemn?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their natures? or their sovereigns, who employ</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All arts to teach their subjects to destroy?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their sabres glittered o’er her little head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence her fair hair rose twining with affright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hidden face was plunged amidst the dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Juan caught a glimpse of this sad sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall not say exactly what he <i>said</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it might not solace “ears polite;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-708" id="noteref-708" epub:type="noteref">708</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what he <i>did</i>, was to lay on their backs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The readiest way of reasoning with Cossacques.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One’s hip he slashed, and split the other’s shoulder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drove them with their brutal yells to seek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If there might be chirurgeons who could solder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wounds they richly merited,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-709" id="noteref-709" epub:type="noteref">709</a> and shriek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their baffled rage and pain; while waxing colder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he turned o’er each pale and gory cheek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don Juan raised his little captive from</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heap a moment more had made her tomb.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And she was chill as they, and on her face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A slender streak of blood announced how near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fate had been to that of all her race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the same blow which laid her mother here</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had scarred her brow, and left its crimson trace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the last link with all she had held dear;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-710" id="noteref-710" epub:type="noteref">710</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But else unhurt, she opened her large eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gazed on Juan with a wild surprise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Just at this instant, while their eyes were fixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon each other, with dilated glance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Juan’s look, pain, pleasure, hope, fear, mixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With joy to save, and dread of some mischance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his protégée; while hers, transfixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With infant terrors, glared as from a trance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pure, transparent, pale, yet radiant face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a lighted alabaster vase:⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-711" id="noteref-711" epub:type="noteref">711</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Up came John Johnson (I will not say <i>“Jack,”</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that were vulgar, cold, and common-place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On great occasions, such as an attack</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On cities, as hath been the present case):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up Johnson came, with hundreds at his back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exclaiming⁠—“Juan! Juan! On, boy! brace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your arm, and I’ll bet Moscow to a dollar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That you and I will win <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s collar.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-712" id="noteref-712" epub:type="noteref">712</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The Seraskier is knocked upon the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the stone bastion still remains, wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old Pacha sits among some hundreds dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smoking his pipe quite calmly ’midst the din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our artillery and his own: ’t is said</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our killed, already piled up to the chin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie round the battery; but still it batters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grape in volleys, like a vineyard, scatters.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then up with me!”⁠—But Juan answered, “Look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon this child⁠—I saved her⁠—must not leave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her life to chance; but point me out some nook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of safety, where she less may shrink and grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I am with you.”⁠—Whereon Johnson took</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A glance around⁠—and shrugged⁠—and twitched his sleeve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And black silk neckcloth⁠—and replied, “You’re right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor thing! what’s to be done? I’m puzzled quite.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Said Juan⁠—“Whatsoever is to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Done, I’ll not quit her till she seems secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of present life a good deal more than we.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quoth Johnson⁠—”<i>Neither</i> will I quite insure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But at the least <i>you</i> may die gloriously.”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan replied⁠—” At least I will endure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er is to be borne⁠—but not resign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This child, who is parentless, and therefore mine.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Johnson said⁠—“Juan, we’ve no time to lose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The child’s a pretty child⁠—a very pretty⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never saw such eyes⁠—but hark! now choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between your fame and feelings, pride and pity:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hark! how the roar increases!⁠—no excuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will serve when there is plunder in a city;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should be loath to march without you, but,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By God! we’ll be too late for the first cut.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan was immovable; until</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Johnson, who really loved him in his way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Picked out amongst his followers with some skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as he thought the least given up to prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, swearing, if the infant came to ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they should all be shot on the next day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if she were delivered safe and sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They should at least have fifty rubles round,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And all allowances besides of plunder</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fair proportion with their comrades;⁠—then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan consented to march on through thunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which thinned at every step their ranks of men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the rest rushed eagerly⁠—no wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they were heated by the hope of gain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing which happens everywhere each day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No hero trusteth wholly to half pay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And such is Victory, and such is Man!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least nine tenths of what we call so:⁠—God</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May have another name for half we scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As human beings, or his ways are odd.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to our subject: a brave Tartar Khan⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or “Sultan,” as the author (to whose nod</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In prose I bend my humble verse) doth call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This chieftain⁠—somehow would not yield at all:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But flanked by <i>five</i> brave sons (such is polygamy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That she spawns warriors by the score, where none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are prosecuted for that false crime bigamy),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He never would believe the city won</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Courage clung but to a single twig.⁠—Am I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Describing Priam’s, Peleus’, or Jove’s son?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Neither⁠—but a good, plain, old, temperate man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fought with his five children in the van.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-713" id="noteref-713" epub:type="noteref">713</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To <i>take</i> him was the point.⁠—The truly brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When they behold the brave oppressed with odds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are touched with a desire to shield and save;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mixture of wild beasts and demi-gods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are they⁠—now furious as the sweeping wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now moved with pity: even as sometimes nods</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rugged tree unto the summer wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compassion breathes along the savage mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But he would <i>not</i> be <i>taken</i>, and replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To all the propositions of surrender</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By mowing Christians down on every side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As obstinate as Swedish Charles at Bender.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-714" id="noteref-714" epub:type="noteref">714</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His five brave boys no less the foe defied;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon the Russian pathos grew less tender</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As being a virtue, like terrestrial patience,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-715" id="noteref-715" epub:type="noteref">715</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apt to wear out on trifling provocations.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And spite of Johnson and of Juan, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Expended all their Eastern phraseology</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In begging him, for God’s sake, just to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much less fight as might form an apology</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For <i>them</i> in saving such a desperate foe⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hewed away, like Doctors of Theology</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they dispute with sceptics; and with curses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck at his friends, as babies beat their nurses.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nay, he had wounded, though but slightly, both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan and Johnson; whereupon they fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first with sighs, the second with an oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon his angry Sultanship, pell-mell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all around were grown exceeding wroth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At such a pertinacious infidel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And poured upon him and his sons like rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which they resisted like a sandy plain</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That drinks and still is dry. At last they perished⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His second son was levelled by a shot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His third was sabred; and the fourth, most cherished</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the five, on bayonets met his lot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fifth, who, by a Christian mother nourished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had been neglected, ill-used, and what not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because deformed, yet died all game and bottom,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-716" id="noteref-716" epub:type="noteref">716</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save a Sire who blushed that he begot him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The eldest was a true and tameless Tartar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As great a scorner of the Nazarene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ever Mahomet picked out for a martyr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who only saw the black-eyed girls in green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who make the beds of those who won’t take quarter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On earth, in Paradise; and when once seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those houris, like all other pretty creatures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Do just whate’er they please, by dint of features.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-112">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And what they pleased to do with the young Khan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Heaven I know not, nor pretend to guess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But doubtless they prefer a fine young man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tough old heroes, and can do no less;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-717" id="noteref-717" epub:type="noteref">717</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that’s the cause no doubt why, if we scan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A field of battle’s ghastly wilderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one rough, weather-beaten, veteran body,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll find ten thousand handsome coxcombs bloody.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-113">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Your houris also have a natural pleasure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In lopping off your lately married men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the bridal hours have danced their measure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the sad, second moon grows dim again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or dull Repentance hath had dreary leisure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wish him back a bachelor now and then:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus your Houri (it may be) disputes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of these brief blossoms the immediate fruits.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-114">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus the young Khan, with Houris in his sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought not upon the charms of four young brides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bravely rushed on his first heavenly night.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In short, howe’er <i>our</i> better faith derides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These black-eyed virgins make the Moslems fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though there were one Heaven and none besides⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereas, if all be true we hear of Heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hell, there must at least be six or seven.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-115">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So fully flashed the phantom on his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That when the very lance was in his heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shouted “Allah!” and saw Paradise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all its veil of mystery drawn apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bright Eternity without disguise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On his soul, like a ceaseless sunrise, dart:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Prophets⁠—Houris⁠—Angels⁠—Saints, descried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one voluptuous blaze⁠—and then he died⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-718" id="noteref-718" epub:type="noteref">718</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-116">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But with a heavenly rapture on his face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The good old Khan, who long had ceased to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Houris, or aught except his florid race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who grew like cedars round him gloriously⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he beheld his latest hero grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earth, which he became like a felled tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paused for a moment from the fight, and cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glance on that slain son, his first and last.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-117">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The soldiers, who beheld him drop his point,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stopped as if once more willing to concede</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quarter, in case he bade them not “aroynt!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As he before had done. He did not heed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their pause nor signs: his heart was out of joint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shook (till now unshaken) like a reed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he looked down upon his children gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And felt⁠—though done with life⁠—he was alone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-719" id="noteref-719" epub:type="noteref">719</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-118">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ’t was a transient tremor:⁠—with a spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Russian steel his breast he flung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As carelessly as hurls the moth her wing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the light wherein she dies: he clung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Closer, that all the deadlier they might wring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the bayonets which had pierced his young;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And throwing back a dim look on his sons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In one wide wound poured forth his soul at once.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-119">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘T is strange enough⁠—the rough, tough soldiers, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spared neither sex nor age in their career</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of carnage, when this old man was pierced through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay before them with his children near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touched by the heroism of him they slew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were melted for a moment; though no tear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flowed from their bloodshot eyes, all red with strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They honoured such determined scorn of Life.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-120">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But the stone bastion still kept up its fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the chief Pacha calmly held his post:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some twenty times he made the Russ retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And baffled the assaults of all their host;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length he condescended to inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If yet the city’s rest were won or lost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being told the latter, sent a Bey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To answer Ribas’ summons to give way.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-720" id="noteref-720" epub:type="noteref">720</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-121">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the mean time, cross-legged, with great sang-froid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the scorching ruins he sat smoking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tobacco on a little carpet;⁠—Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saw nothing like the scene around;⁠—yet looking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With martial Stoicism, nought seemed to annoy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His stern philosophy; but gently stroking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His beard, he puffed his pipe’s ambrosial gales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he had three lives, as well as tails.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-721" id="noteref-721" epub:type="noteref">721</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-122">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The town was taken⁠—whether he might yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself or bastion, little mattered now:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His stubborn valour was no future shield.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ismail’s no more! The Crescent’s silver bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sunk, and the crimson Cross glared o’er the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But red with no <i>redeeming</i> gore: the glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of burning streets, like moonlight on the water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was imaged back in blood, the sea of slaughter.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-722" id="noteref-722" epub:type="noteref">722</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-123">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All that the mind would shrink from of excesses⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that the body perpetrates of bad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that we read⁠—hear⁠—dream, of man’s distresses⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that the Devil would do if run stark mad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that defies the worst which pen expresses⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All by which Hell is peopled, or as sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Hell⁠—mere mortals who their power abuse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was here (as heretofore and since) let loose.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-124">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If here and there some transient trait of pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was shown, and some more noble heart broke through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its bloody bond, and saved, perhaps, some pretty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Child, or an agéd, helpless man or two⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What’s this in one annihilated city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where thousand loves, and ties, and duties grew?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cockneys of London! Muscadins of Paris!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just ponder what a pious pastime War is.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-723" id="noteref-723" epub:type="noteref">723</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-125">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Think how the joys of reading a Gazette</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are purchased by all agonies and crimes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if these do not move you, don’t forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such doom may be your own in after-times.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime the Taxes, Castlereagh, and Debt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are hints as good as sermons, or as rhymes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read your own hearts and Ireland’s present story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then feed her famine fat with Wellesley’s glory.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-126">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But still there is unto a patriot nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which loves so well its country and its King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A subject of sublimest exultation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bear it, ye Muses, on your brightest wing!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howe’er the mighty locust, Desolation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strip your green fields, and to your harvests cling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gaunt famine never shall approach the throne⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Ireland starve, great George weighs twenty stone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-724" id="noteref-724" epub:type="noteref">724</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-127">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But let me put an end unto my theme:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was an end of Ismail⁠—hapless town!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far flashed her burning towers o’er Danube’s stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And redly ran his blushing waters down.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horrid war-whoop and the shriller scream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rose still; but fainter were the thunders grown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of forty thousand who had manned the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hundreds breathed⁠—the rest were silent all!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-725" id="noteref-725" epub:type="noteref">725</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-128">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In one thing ne’ertheless ’t is fit to praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Russian army upon this occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virtue much in fashion now-a-days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore worthy of commemoration:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-726" id="noteref-726" epub:type="noteref">726</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The topic’s tender, so shall be my phrase⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps the season’s chill, and their long station</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Winter’s depth, or want of rest and victual,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had made them chaste;⁠—they ravished very little.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-129">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Much did they slay, more plunder, and no less</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might here and there occur some violation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the other line;⁠—but not to such excess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when the French, that dissipated nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take towns by storm: no causes can I guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except cold weather and commiseration;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-727" id="noteref-727" epub:type="noteref">727</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all the ladies, save some twenty score,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were almost as much virgins as before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-130">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some odd mistakes, too, happened in the dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which showed a want of lanterns, or of taste⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed the smoke was such they scarce could mark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their friends from foes⁠—besides such things from haste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Occur, though rarely, when there is a spark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of light to save the venerably chaste:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But six old damsels, each of seventy years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were all deflowered by different grenadiers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-131">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But on the whole their continence was great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that some disappointment there ensued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who had felt the inconvenient state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of “single blessedness,” and thought it good</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Since it was not their fault, but only fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bear these crosses) for each waning prude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a Roman sort of Sabine wedding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the expense and the suspense of bedding.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-132">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some voices of the buxom middle-aged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were also heard to wonder in the din</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Widows of forty were these birds long caged)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Wherefore the ravishing did not begin!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But while the thirst for gore and plunder raged,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was small leisure for superfluous sin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whether they escaped or no, lies hid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In darkness⁠—I can only hope they did.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-133">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suwarrow now was conqueror⁠—a match</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Timour or for Zinghis in his trade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While mosques and streets, beneath his eyes, like thatch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blazed, and the cannon’s roar was scarce allayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With bloody hands he wrote his first despatch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here exactly follows what he said:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Glory to <i>God</i> and to the Empress!” (<i>Powers</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Eternal! such names mingled!</i>) “Ismail’s ours.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-728" id="noteref-728" epub:type="noteref">728</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-134">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Methinks these are the most tremendous words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since “<span class="smcap">Mene, Mene, Tekel</span>,” and “<span class="smcap">Upharsin</span>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which hands or pens have ever traced of swords.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaven help me! I’m but little of a parson:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Daniel read was short-hand of the Lord’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Severe, sublime; the prophet wrote no farce on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fate of nations;⁠—but this Russ so witty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could rhyme, like Nero, o’er a burning city.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-135">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He wrote this Polar melody, and set it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Duly accompanied by shrieks and groans,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which few will sing, I trust, but none forget it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I will teach, if possible, the stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To rise against Earth’s tyrants. Never let it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be said that we still truckle unto thrones;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ye⁠—our children’s children! think how we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showed <i>what things were</i> before the World was free!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-136">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That hour is not for us, but ’t is for you:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as, in the great joy of your Millennium,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You hardly will believe such things were true</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As now occur, I thought that I would pen you ’em;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But may their very memory perish too!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet if perchance remembered, still disdain you ’em</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than you scorn the savages of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who <i>painted</i> their <i>bare</i> limbs, but <i>not</i> with gore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-137">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when you hear historians talk of thrones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And those that sate upon them, let it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we now gaze upon the mammoth’s bones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonder what old world such things could see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hieroglyphics on Egyptian stones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pleasant riddles of futurity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guessing at what shall happily be hid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the real purpose of a pyramid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-138">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Reader! I have kept my word⁠—at least so far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the first Canto promised. You have now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had sketches of Love⁠—Tempest⁠—Travel⁠—War⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All very accurate, you must allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <i>Epic</i>, if plain truth should prove no bar;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I have drawn much less with a long bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than my forerunners. Carelessly I sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Phoebus lends me now and then a string,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-139">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With which I still can harp, and carp, and fiddle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What further hath befallen or may befall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hero of this grand poetic riddle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I by and by may tell you, if at all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now I choose to break off in the middle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worn out with battering Ismail’s stubborn wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Juan is sent off with the despatch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which all Petersburgh is on the watch.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-140">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This special honour was conferred, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had behaved with courage and humanity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which last men like, when they have time to pause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From their ferocities produced by vanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His little captive gained him some applause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For saving her amidst the wild insanity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of carnage⁠—and I think he was more glad in her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safety, than his new order of <abbr>St.</abbr> Vladimir.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-8-141">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Moslem orphan went with her protector,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was homeless, houseless, helpless; all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her friends, like the sad family of Hector,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had perished in the field or by the wall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her very place of birth was but a spectre</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what it had been; there the Muezzin’s call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prayer was heard no more!⁠—and Juan wept,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made a vow to shield her, which he kept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
