<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-9-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-729" id="noteref-729" epub:type="noteref">729</a></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, Wellington! (or “Villainton”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-730" id="noteref-730" epub:type="noteref">730</a>⁠—for Fame<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-731" id="noteref-731" epub:type="noteref">731</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sounds the heroic syllables both ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>France could not even conquer your great name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But punned it down to this facetious phrase⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beating or beaten she will laugh the same,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You have obtained great pensions and much praise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory like yours should any dare gainsay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Humanity would rise, and thunder “Nay!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-732" id="noteref-732" epub:type="noteref">732</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I don’t think that you used Kinnaird quite well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Marinèt’s affair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-733" id="noteref-733" epub:type="noteref">733</a>⁠—in fact, ’twas shabby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like some other things won’t do to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon your tomb in Westminster’s old Abbey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the rest ’tis not worth while to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such tales being for the tea-hours of some tabby;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-734" id="noteref-734" epub:type="noteref">734</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though your years as <em>man</em> tend fast to zero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fact your Grace is still but a <em>young Hero</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though Britain owes (and pays you too) so much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet Europe doubtless owes you greatly more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You have repaired Legitimacy’s crutch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A prop not quite so certain as before:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Spanish, and the French, as well as Dutch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have seen, and felt, how strongly you <em>restore</em>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Waterloo has made the world your debtor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I wish your bards would sing it rather better).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>You are “the best of cut-throats:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-735" id="noteref-735" epub:type="noteref">735</a>⁠—do not start;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The phrase is Shakespeare’s, and not misapplied:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>War’s a brain-spattering, windpipe-slitting art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless her cause by right be sanctified.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you have acted <em>once</em> a generous part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The World, not the World’s masters, will decide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall be delighted to learn who,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save you and yours, have gained by Waterloo?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I am no flatterer⁠—you’ve supped full of flattery:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-736" id="noteref-736" epub:type="noteref">736</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They say you like it too⁠—’tis no great wonder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He whose whole life has been assault and battery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At last may get a little tired of thunder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swallowing eulogy much more than satire, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May like being praised for every lucky blunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called “Saviour of the Nations”⁠—not yet saved⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And “Europe’s Liberator”⁠—still enslaved.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-737" id="noteref-737" epub:type="noteref">737</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’ve done. Now go and dine from off the plate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presented by the Prince of the Brazils,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And send the sentinel before your gate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A slice or two from your luxurious meals:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-738" id="noteref-738" epub:type="noteref">738</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fought, but has not fed so well of late.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some hunger, too, they say the people feels:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no doubt that you deserve your ration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But pray give back a little to the nation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I don’t mean to reflect⁠—a man so great as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You, my lord Duke! is far above reflection:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The high Roman fashion, too, of Cincinnatus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With modern history has but small connection:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though as an Irishman you love potatoes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You need not take them under your direction;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And half a million for your Sabine farm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is rather dear!⁠—I’m sure I mean no harm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Great men have always scorned great recompenses:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Epaminondas saved his Thebes, and died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not leaving even his funeral expenses:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-739" id="noteref-739" epub:type="noteref">739</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">George Washington had thanks, and nought beside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except the all-cloudless glory (which few men’s is)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To free his country: Pitt too had his pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a high-souled Minister of state is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Renowned for ruining Great Britain gratis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-740" id="noteref-740" epub:type="noteref">740</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Never had mortal man such opportunity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except Napoleon, or abused it more:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You might have freed fallen Europe from the unity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Tyrants, and been blest from shore to shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <em>now</em>⁠—what is your fame? Shall the Muse tune it ye?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>Now</em>⁠—that the rabble’s first vain shouts are o’er?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go! hear it in your famished country’s cries!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold the World! and curse your victories!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As these new cantos touch on warlike feats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To <em>you</em> the unflattering Muse deigns to inscribe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-741" id="noteref-741" epub:type="noteref">741</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Truths, that you will not read in the Gazettes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But which ’tis time to teach the hireling tribe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fatten on their country’s gore, and debts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must be recited⁠—and without a bribe.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You <em>did great</em> things, but not being <em>great</em> in mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have left <em>undone</em> the <em>greatest</em>⁠—and mankind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Death laughs⁠—Go ponder o’er the skeleton</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which men image out the unknown thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hides the past world, like to a set sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which still elsewhere may rouse a brighter spring⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death laughs at all you weep for!⁠—look upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This hourly dread of all! whose <em>threatened sting</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turns Life to terror, even though in its sheath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mark! how its lipless mouth grins without breath!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Mark! how it laughs and scorns at all you are!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet <em>was</em> what you are; from <em>ear</em> to <em>ear</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>It <em>laughs not</em>⁠—there is now no fleshy bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So called; the Antic long hath ceased to <em>hear</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still he <em>smiles</em>; and whether near or far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He strips from man that mantle (far more dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than even the tailor’s), his incarnate skin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-742" id="noteref-742" epub:type="noteref">742</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>White, black, or copper⁠—the dead bones will grin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus Death laughs⁠—it is sad merriment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still it <em>is</em> so; and with such example</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why should not Life be equally content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his Superior, in a smile to trample</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the nothings which are daily spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like bubbles on an Ocean much less ample</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the Eternal Deluge, which devours</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suns as rays⁠—worlds like atoms⁠—years like hours?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To be, or not to be? <em>that</em> is the question,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Says Shakespeare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-743" id="noteref-743" epub:type="noteref">743</a> who just now is much in fashion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am neither Alexander nor Hephaestion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor ever had for <em>abstract</em> fame much passion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But would much rather have a sound digestion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than Bonaparte’s cancer:⁠—could I dash on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through fifty victories to shame or fame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a stomach what were a good name?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">O dura ilia messorum!</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-744" id="noteref-744" epub:type="noteref">744</a>⁠—“Oh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye rigid guts of reapers!” I translate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-745" id="noteref-745" epub:type="noteref">745</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the great benefit of those who know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What indigestion is⁠—that inward fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which makes all Styx through one small liver flow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A peasant’s sweat is worth his lord’s estate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let <em>this</em> one toil for bread⁠—<em>that</em> rack for rent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who sleeps best may be the most content.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To be, or not to be?”⁠—Ere I decide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I should be glad to know that which <em>is being</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true we speculate both far and wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deem, because we <em>see</em>, we are <em>all-seeing</em>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For my part, I’ll enlist on neither side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until I see both sides for once agreeing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, I sometimes think that Life is Death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather than Life a mere affair of breath.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">Que scais-je</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-746" id="noteref-746" epub:type="noteref">746</a> was the motto of Montaigne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As also of the first academicians:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all is dubious which man may attain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was one of their most favourite positions.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s no such thing as certainty, that’s plain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any of Mortality’s conditions;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So little do we know what we’re about in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This world, I doubt if doubt itself be doubting.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is a pleasant voyage perhaps to float,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Pyrrho,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-747" id="noteref-747" epub:type="noteref">747</a> on a sea of speculation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what if carrying sail capsize the boat?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your wise men don’t know much of navigation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swimming long in the abyss of thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is apt to tire: a calm and shallow station</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well nigh the shore, where one stoops down and gathers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some pretty shell, is best for moderate bathers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But Heaven,” as Cassio says, “is above all⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-748" id="noteref-748" epub:type="noteref">748</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No more of this, then, let us pray!” We have</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Souls to save, since Eve’s slip and Adam’s fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which tumbled all mankind into the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides fish, beasts, and birds. “The sparrow’s fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is special providence,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-749" id="noteref-749" epub:type="noteref">749</a> though how <em>it</em> gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Offence, we know not; probably it perched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the tree which Eve so fondly searched.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! ye immortal Gods! what is Theogony?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh! thou, too, mortal man! what is Philanthropy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! World, which was and is, what is Cosmogony?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some people have accused me of Misanthropy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I know no more than the mahogany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That forms this desk, of what they mean;⁠—Lykanthropy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-750" id="noteref-750" epub:type="noteref">750</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I comprehend, for without transformation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men become wolves on any slight occasion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I, the mildest, meekest of mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Moses, or Melancthon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-751" id="noteref-751" epub:type="noteref">751</a> who have ne’er<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-752" id="noteref-752" epub:type="noteref">752</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Done anything exceedingly unkind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And (though I could not now and then forbear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Following the bent of body or of mind)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have always had a tendency to spare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do they call me Misanthrope? Because</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>They hate me, not I them</em>:⁠—and here we’ll pause.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis time we should proceed with our good poem⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I maintain that it is really good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only in the body but the proem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However little both are understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just now⁠—but by and by the Truth will show ’em</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herself in her sublimest attitude:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And till she doth, I fain must be content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To share her beauty and her banishment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our hero (and, I trust, kind reader! yours)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was left upon his way to the chief city</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the immortal Peter’s polished boors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who still have shown themselves more brave than witty.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know its mighty Empire now allures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much flattery⁠—even Voltaire’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-753" id="noteref-753" epub:type="noteref">753</a> and that’s a pity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me, I deem an absolute autocrat</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Not</em> a barbarian, but much worse than that.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And I will war, at least in words (and⁠—should</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My chance so happen⁠—deeds), with all who war</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Thought;⁠—and of Thought’s foes by far most rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tyrants and sycophants have been and are.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not who may conquer: if I could</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have such a prescience, it should be no bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this my plain, sworn, downright detestation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every despotism in every nation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-754" id="noteref-754" epub:type="noteref">754</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is not that I adulate the people:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without <em>me</em>, there are demagogues enough,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-755" id="noteref-755" epub:type="noteref">755</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And infidels, to pull down every steeple,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And set up in their stead some proper stuff.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether they may sow scepticism to reap Hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As is the Christian dogma rather rough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not know;⁠—I wish men to be free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As much from mobs as kings⁠—from you as me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The consequence is, being of no party,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I shall offend all parties:⁠—never mind!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My words, at least, are more sincere and hearty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than if I sought to sail before the wind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who has nought to gain can have small art: he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who neither wishes to be bound nor bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May still expatiate freely, as will I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor give my voice to slavery’s jackal cry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-756" id="noteref-756" epub:type="noteref">756</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span><em>That</em>’s an appropriate simile, <em>that jackal</em>;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ve heard them in the Ephesian ruins howl<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-757" id="noteref-757" epub:type="noteref">757</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By night, as do that mercenary pack all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Power’s base purveyors, who for pickings prowl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scent the prey their masters would attack all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However, the poor jackals are less foul</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As being the brave lions’ keen providers)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than human insects, catering for spiders.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-758" id="noteref-758" epub:type="noteref">758</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Raise but an arm! ’t will brush their web away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And without <em>that</em>, their poison and their claws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are useless. Mind, good people! what I say⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Or rather Peoples)⁠—<em>go on</em> without pause!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The web of these Tarantulas each day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Increases, till you shall make common cause:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None, save the Spanish Fly and Attic Bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As yet are strongly stinging to be free.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-759" id="noteref-759" epub:type="noteref">759</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan, who had shone in the late slaughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was left upon his way with the despatch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where blood was talked of as we would of water;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And carcasses that lay as thick as thatch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er silenced cities, merely served to flatter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair Catherine’s pastime⁠—who looked on the match</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between these nations as a main of cocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wherein she liked her own to stand like rocks.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And there in a <i xml:lang="ru-Latn">kibitka</i> he rolled on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A cursèd sort of carriage without springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which on rough roads leaves scarcely a whole bone,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pondering on Glory, Chivalry, and Kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Orders, and on all that he had done⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wishing that post-horses had the wings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Pegasus, or at the least post-chaises</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had feathers, when a traveller on deep ways is.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At every jolt⁠—and they were many⁠—still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turned his eyes upon his little charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he wished that she should fare less ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than he, in these sad highways left at large</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ruts, and flints, and lovely Nature’s skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who is no paviour, nor admits a barge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On <em>her</em> canals, where God takes sea and land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fishery and farm, both into his own hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At least he pays no rent, and has best right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be the first of what we used to call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Gentlemen farmers”⁠—a race worn out quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since lately there have been no rents at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And “gentlemen” are in a piteous plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And “farmers” can’t raise Ceres from her fall:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She fell with Bonaparte,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-760" id="noteref-760" epub:type="noteref">760</a>⁠—What strange thoughts</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arise, when we see Emperors fall with oats!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan turned his eyes on the sweet child</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom he had saved from slaughter⁠—what a trophy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! ye who build up monuments, defiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With gore, like Nadir Shah,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-761" id="noteref-761" epub:type="noteref">761</a> that costive Sophy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, after leaving Hindostan a wild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scarce to the Mogul a cup of coffee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To soothe his woes withal, was slain, the sinner!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he could no more digest his dinner;⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-762" id="noteref-762" epub:type="noteref">762</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-763" id="noteref-763" epub:type="noteref">763</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh ye! or we! or he! or she! reflect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That <em>one</em> life saved, especially if young</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or pretty, is a thing to recollect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Far sweeter than the greenest laurels sprung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the manure of human clay, though decked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the praises ever said or sung:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hymned by every harp, unless within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your heart joins chorus, Fame is but a din.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! ye great authors luminous, voluminous!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye twice ten hundred thousand daily scribes!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose pamphlets, volumes, newspapers, illumine us!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether you’re paid by government in bribes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove the public debt is not consuming us⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, roughly treading on the “courtier’s kibes”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With clownish heel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-764" id="noteref-764" epub:type="noteref">764</a> your popular circulation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feeds you by printing half the realm’s starvation;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, ye great authors!⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">À propos des bottes,</i>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have forgotten what I meant to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As sometimes have been greater sages’ lots;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas something calculated to allay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All wrath in barracks, palaces, or cots:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes it would have been but thrown away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that’s one comfort for my lost advice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although no doubt it was beyond all price.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But let it go:⁠—it will one day be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With other relics of “a former World,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When this World shall be <em>former</em>, underground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrown topsy-turvy, twisted, crisped, and curled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baked, fried, or burnt, turned inside-out, or drowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like all the worlds before, which have been hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First out of, and then back again to chaos⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The superstratum which will overlay us.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-765" id="noteref-765" epub:type="noteref">765</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So Cuvier says:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-766" id="noteref-766" epub:type="noteref">766</a>⁠—and then shall come again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the new creation, rising out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From our old crash, some mystic, ancient strain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of things destroyed and left in airy doubt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to the notions we now entertain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Titans, giants, fellows of about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hundred feet in height, <em>not</em> to say <em>miles</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mammoths, and your wingèd crocodiles.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Think if then George the Fourth should be dug up!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-767" id="noteref-767" epub:type="noteref">767</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How the new worldlings of the then new East</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will wonder where such animals could sup!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For they themselves will be but of the least:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even worlds miscarry, when too oft they pup,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every new creation hath decreased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In size, from overworking the material⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men are but maggots of some huge Earth’s burial.)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span><em>How</em> will⁠—to these young people, just thrust out</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From some fresh Paradise, and set to plough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dig, and sweat, and turn themselves about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And plant, and reap, and spin, and grind, and sow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till all the arts at length are brought about,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially of War and taxing⁠—<em>how</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, will these great relics, when they see ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look like the monsters of a new Museum!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I am apt to grow too metaphysical:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The time is out of joint,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-768" id="noteref-768" epub:type="noteref">768</a>⁠—and so am I;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I quite forget this poem’s merely quizzical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And deviate into matters rather dry.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ne’er decide what I shall say, and this I call<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-769" id="noteref-769" epub:type="noteref">769</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much too poetical: men should know why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They write, and for what end; but, note or text,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I never know the word which will come next.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So on I ramble, now and then narrating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now pondering:⁠—it is time we should narrate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I left Don Juan with his horses baiting⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now we’ll get o’er the ground at a great rate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall not be particular in stating</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His journey, we’ve so many tours of late:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suppose him then at Petersburgh; suppose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That pleasant capital of painted snows;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-770" id="noteref-770" epub:type="noteref">770</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suppose him in a handsome uniform⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A scarlet coat, black facings, a long plume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waving, like sails new shivered in a storm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over a cocked hat in a crowded room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brilliant breeches, bright as a Cairn Gorme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of yellow casimire we may presume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White stockings drawn uncurdled as new milk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er limbs whose symmetry set off the silk;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-771" id="noteref-771" epub:type="noteref">771</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suppose him sword by side, and hat in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made up by Youth, Fame, and an army tailor⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That great enchanter, at whose rod’s command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beauty springs forth, and Nature’s self turns paler,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing how Art can make her work more grand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(When she don’t pin men’s limbs in like a gaoler)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behold him placed as if upon a pillar! He<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-772" id="noteref-772" epub:type="noteref">772</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seems Love turned a Lieutenant of Artillery!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-773" id="noteref-773" epub:type="noteref">773</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His bandage slipped down into a cravat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His wings subdued to epaulettes⁠—his quiver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shrunk to a scabbard, with his arrows at</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His side as a small sword, but sharp as ever⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bow converted into a cocked hat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still so like, that Psyche were more clever</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than some wives (who make blunders no less stupid),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she had not mistaken him for Cupid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The courtiers stared, the ladies whispered, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Empress smiled: the reigning favourite frowned⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-774" id="noteref-774" epub:type="noteref">774</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I quite forget which of them was in hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just then, as they are rather numerous found,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-775" id="noteref-775" epub:type="noteref">775</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who took, by turns, that difficult command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since first her Majesty was singly crowned:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-776" id="noteref-776" epub:type="noteref">776</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they were mostly nervous six-foot fellows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All fit to make a Patagonian jealous.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan was none of these, but slight and slim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blushing and beardless; and, yet, ne’ertheless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a something in his turn of limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still more in his eye, which seemed to express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, though he looked one of the Seraphim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There lurked a man beneath the Spirit’s dress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, the Empress sometimes liked a boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had just buried the fair-faced Lanskoi.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-777" id="noteref-777" epub:type="noteref">777</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-778" id="noteref-778" epub:type="noteref">778</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No wonder then that Yermoloff, or Momonoff,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-779" id="noteref-779" epub:type="noteref">779</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Scherbatoff, or any other <em>off</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or <em>on</em>, might dread her Majesty had not room enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within her bosom (which was not too tough),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a new flame; a thought to cast of gloom enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the aspect, whether smooth or rough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of him who, in the language of his station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then held that “high official situation.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O gentle ladies! should you seek to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The import of this diplomatic phrase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bid Ireland’s Londonderry’s Marquess<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-780" id="noteref-780" epub:type="noteref">780</a> show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His parts of speech, and in the strange displays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that odd string of words, all in a row,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which none divine, and every one obeys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps you may pick out some queer <em>no</em> meaning⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that weak wordy harvest the sole gleaning.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I think I can explain myself without</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sad inexplicable beast of prey⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Sphinx, whose words would ever be a doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Did not his deeds unriddle them each day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That monstrous hieroglyphic⁠—that long spout</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of blood and water⁠—leaden Castlereagh!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And here I must an anecdote relate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But luckily of no great length or weight.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An English lady asked of an Italian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What were the actual and official duties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the strange thing some women set a value on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hovers oft about some married beauties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called “Cavalier Servente?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-781" id="noteref-781" epub:type="noteref">781</a>⁠—a Pygmalion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose statues warm (I fear, alas! too true ’tis)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beneath his art:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-782" id="noteref-782" epub:type="noteref">782</a>⁠—the dame, pressed to disclose them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said⁠—“Lady, I beseech you to <em>suppose them</em>.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus I supplicate your supposition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mildest, matron-like interpretation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the imperial favourite’s condition.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas a high place, the highest in the nation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fact, if not in rank; and the suspicion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of any one’s attaining to his station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt gave pain, where each new pair of shoulders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If rather broad, made stocks rise⁠—and their holders.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, I said, was a most beauteous boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And had retained his boyish look beyond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The usual hirsute seasons which destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With beards and whiskers, and the like, the fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Parisian</em> aspect, which upset old Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And founded Doctors’ Commons:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-783" id="noteref-783" epub:type="noteref">783</a>⁠—I have conned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The history of divorces, which, though chequered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Calls Ilion’s the first damages on record.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Catherine, who loved all things (save her Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was gone to his place), and passed for much,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admiring those (by dainty dames abhorred)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gigantic gentlemen, yet had a touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sentiment: and he she most adored</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was the lamented Lanskoi, who was such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lover as had cost her many a tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet but made a middling grenadier.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh thou “<i xml:lang="la">teterrima causa</i>” of all “<i xml:lang="la">belli</i>”⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-784" id="noteref-784" epub:type="noteref">784</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou gate of Life and Death⁠—thou nondescript!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence is our exit and our entrance⁠—well I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May pause in pondering how all souls are dipped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In thy perennial fountain:⁠—how man <em>fell</em> I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Know not, since Knowledge saw her branches stripped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her first fruit; but how he <em>falls</em> and rises</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since⁠—<em>thou</em> hast settled beyond all surmises.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some call thee “the <em>worst</em> cause of War,” but I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Maintain thou art the <em>best</em>:⁠—for after all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From thee we come, to thee we go, and why</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To get at thee not batter down a wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or waste a World? since no one can deny</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou dost replenish worlds both great and small:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With⁠—or without thee⁠—all things at a stand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-785" id="noteref-785" epub:type="noteref">785</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are, or would be, thou sea of Life’s dry land!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-786" id="noteref-786" epub:type="noteref">786</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Catherine, who was the grand Epitome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that great cause of War, or Peace, or what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You please (it causes all the things which be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So you may take your choice of this or that)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Catherine, I say, was very glad to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The handsome herald, on whose plumage sat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-787" id="noteref-787" epub:type="noteref">787</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Victory; and, pausing as she saw him kneel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his despatch, forgot to break the seal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then recollecting the whole Empress, nor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forgetting quite the Woman (which composed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least three parts of this great whole), she tore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The letter open with an air which posed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Court, that watched each look her visage wore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until a royal smile at length disclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair weather for the day. Though rather spacious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her face was noble, her eyes fine, mouth gracious.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-788" id="noteref-788" epub:type="noteref">788</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Great joy was hers, or rather joys: the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was a ta’en city, thirty thousand slain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory and triumph o’er her aspect burst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As an East Indian sunrise on the main:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These quenched a moment her Ambition’s thirst⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Arab deserts drink in Summer’s rain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain!⁠—As fall the dews on quenchless sands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blood only serves to wash Ambition’s hands!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her next amusement was more fanciful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She smiled at mad Suwarrow’s rhymes, who threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a Russian couplet rather dull</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole gazette of thousands whom he slew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her third was feminine enough to annul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shudder which runs naturally through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our veins, when things called Sovereigns think it best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kill, and Generals turn it into jest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The two first feelings ran their course complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lighted first her eye, and then her mouth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole court looked immediately most sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like flowers well watered after a long drouth:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when on the Lieutenant at her feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Majesty, who liked to gaze on youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost as much as on a new despatch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glanced mildly⁠—all the world was on the watch.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though somewhat large, exuberant, and truculent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When <em>wroth</em>⁠—while <em>pleased</em>, she was as fine a figure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those who like things rosy, ripe, and succulent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would wish to look on, while they are in vigour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could repay each amatory look you lent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With interest, and, in turn, was wont with rigour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To exact of Cupid’s bills the full amount</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At sight, nor would permit you to discount.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With her the latter, though at times convenient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not so necessary; for they tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she was handsome, and though fierce <em>looked</em> lenient,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And always used her favourites too well.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If once beyond her boudoir’s precincts in ye went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your “fortune” was in a fair way “to swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man” (as Giles says);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-789" id="noteref-789" epub:type="noteref">789</a> for though she would widow all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nations, she liked Man as an individual.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What a strange thing is Man! and what a stranger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is Woman! What a whirlwind is her head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what a whirlpool full of depth and danger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is all the rest about her! Whether wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or widow⁠—maid⁠—or mother, she can change her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mind like the wind: whatever she has said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or done, is light to what she’ll say or do;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The oldest thing on record, and yet new!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh Catherine! (for of all interjections,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thee both <em>oh</em>! and <em>ah</em>! belong, of right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Love and War) how odd are the connections</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of human thoughts, which jostle in their flight!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just now <em>yours</em> were cut out in different sections:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>First</em> Ismail’s capture caught your fancy quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Next</em> of new knights, the fresh and glorious batch:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <em>thirdly</em> he who brought you the despatch!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Shakespeare talks of “the herald Mercury</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-790" id="noteref-790" epub:type="noteref">790</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some such visions crossed her Majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While her young herald knelt before her still.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis very true the hill seemed rather high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a Lieutenant to climb up; but skill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smoothed even the Simplon’s steep, and by God’s blessing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Youth and Health all kisses are “Heaven-kissing.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her Majesty looked down, the youth looked up⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so they fell in love;⁠—she with his face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His grace, his God-knows-what: for Cupid’s cup</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the first draught intoxicates apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quintessential laudanum or “Black Drop,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes one drunk at once, without the base</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expedient of full bumpers; for the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In love drinks all Life’s fountains (save tears) dry.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He, on the other hand, if not in love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell into that no less imperious passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Self-love⁠—which, when some sort of thing above</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ourselves, a singer, dancer, much in fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Duchess⁠—Princess⁠—Empress, “deigns to prove”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-791" id="noteref-791" epub:type="noteref">791</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(’Tis Pope’s phrase) a great longing, though a rash one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one especial person out of many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make us believe ourselves as good as any.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Besides, he was of that delighted age</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes all female ages equal⁠—when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We don’t much care with whom we may engage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As bold as Daniel in the lions’ den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that we can our native sun assuage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the next ocean, which may flow just then⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a <em>twilight</em> in, just as Sol’s heat is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quenched in the lap of the salt sea, or Thetis.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Catherine (we must say thus much for Catherine),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though bold and bloody, was the kind of thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose temporary passion was quite flattering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because each lover looked a sort of King,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made up upon an amatory pattern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A royal husband in all save the <em>ring</em>⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-792" id="noteref-792" epub:type="noteref">792</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, (being the damnedest part of matrimony,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed taking out the sting to leave the honey:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when you add to this, her Womanhood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In its meridian, her blue eyes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-793" id="noteref-793" epub:type="noteref">793</a> or gray⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The last, if they have soul, are quite as good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or better, as the best examples say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Napoleon’s, Mary’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-794" id="noteref-794" epub:type="noteref">794</a> (Queen of Scotland), should</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lend to that colour a transcendent ray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Pallas also sanctions the same hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too wise to look through optics black or blue)⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her sweet smile, and her then majestic figure,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-795" id="noteref-795" epub:type="noteref">795</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her plumpness, her imperial condescension,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her preference of a boy to men much bigger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Fellows whom Messalina’s self would pension),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her prime of life, just now in juicy vigour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With other <em>extras</em>, which we need not mention⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these, or any one of these, explain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough to make a stripling very vain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And that’s enough, for Love is vanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Selfish in its beginning as its end,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-796" id="noteref-796" epub:type="noteref">796</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except where ’tis a mere insanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A maddening spirit which would strive to blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Itself with Beauty’s frail inanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the Passion’s self seems to depend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hence some heathenish philosophers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make Love the main-spring of the Universe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Besides Platonic love, besides the love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of God, the love of sentiment, the</span>
					<br/>
					<span>loving Of faithful pairs⁠—(I needs must rhyme with dove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That good old steam-boat which keeps verses moving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst reason⁠—Reason ne’er was hand-and-glove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rhyme, but always leant less to improving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sound than sense)⁠—besides all these pretences</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Love, there are those things which words name senses;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Those movements, those improvements in our bodies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which make all bodies anxious to get out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their own sand-pits, to mix with a goddess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such all women are at first no doubt.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-797" id="noteref-797" epub:type="noteref">797</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How beautiful that moment! and how odd is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That fever which precedes the languid rout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of our sensations! What a curious way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole thing is of clothing souls in clay!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-798" id="noteref-798" epub:type="noteref">798</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-799" id="noteref-799" epub:type="noteref">799</a></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The noblest kind of love is love Platonical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To end or to begin with; the next grand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that which may be christened love canonical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the clergy take the thing in hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third sort to be noted in our chronicle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As flourishing in every Christian land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is when chaste matrons to their other ties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Add what may be called <em>marriage in disguise</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well, we won’t analyse⁠—our story must</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tell for itself: the Sovereign was smitten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan much flattered by her love, or lust;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cannot stop to alter words once written,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the <em>two</em> are so mixed with human dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he who <em>names one</em>, both perchance may hit on:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in such matters Russia’s mighty Empress</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behaved no better than a common sempstress.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The whole court melted into one wide whisper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all lips were applied unto all ears!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The elder ladies’ wrinkles curled much crisper</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they beheld; the younger cast some leers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On one another, and each lovely lisper</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiled as she talked the matter o’er; but tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of rivalship rose in each clouded eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the standing army who stood by.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All the ambassadors of all the powers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inquired, Who was this very new young man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who promised to be great in some few hours?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is full soon (though Life is but a span).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already they beheld the silver showers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rubles rain, as fast as specie can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his cabinet, besides the presents</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of several ribbons, and some thousand peasants.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-800" id="noteref-800" epub:type="noteref">800</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Catherine was generous⁠—all such ladies are:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love⁠—that great opener of the heart and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ways that lead there, be they near or far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above, below, by turnpikes great or small⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love⁠—(though she had a cursèd taste for War,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was not the best wife unless we call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such Clytemnestra, though perhaps ’tis better</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one should die⁠—than two drag on the fetter)⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Love had made Catherine make each lover’s fortune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlike our own half-chaste Elizabeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose avarice all disbursements did importune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If History, the grand liar, ever saith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The truth; and though grief her old age might shorten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because she put a favourite to death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her vile, ambiguous method of flirtation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stinginess, disgrace her sex and station.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But when the levée rose, and all was bustle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the dissolving circle, all the nations’</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ambassadors began as ’twere to hustle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Round the young man with their congratulations.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also the softer silks were heard to rustle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gentle dames, among whose recreations</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is to speculate on handsome faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Especially when such lead to high places.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, who found himself, he knew not how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A general object of attention, made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His answers with a very graceful bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if born for the ministerial trade.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though modest, on his unembarrassed brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nature had written “Gentleman!” He said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little, but to the purpose; and his manner</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flung hovering graces o’er him like a banner.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An order from her Majesty consigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our young Lieutenant to the genial care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those in office: all the world looked kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(As it will look sometimes with the first stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Youth would not act ill to keep in mind,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As also did Miss Protasoff<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-801" id="noteref-801" epub:type="noteref">801</a> then there,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-802" id="noteref-802" epub:type="noteref">802</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Named from her mystic office “<i xml:lang="fr">l’Éprouveuse</i>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A term inexplicable to the Muse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-9-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With <em>her</em> then, as in humble duty bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan retired⁠—and so will I, until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Pegasus shall tire of touching ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We have just lit on a “heaven-kissing hill,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So lofty that I feel my brain turn round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all my fancies whirling like a mill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is a signal to my nerves and brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take a quiet ride in some green lane.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-803" id="noteref-803" epub:type="noteref">803</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
