<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</span>
				<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-7-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Love! O Glory! what are ye who fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around us ever, rarely to alight?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There's not a meteor in the polar sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such transcendent and more fleeting flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chill, and chained to cold earth, we lift on high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our eyes in search of either lovely light;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand and a thousand colours they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Assume, then leave us on our freezing way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And such as they are, such my present tale is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A nondescript and ever-varying rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A versified Aurora Borealis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flashes o'er a waste and icy clime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we know what all are, we must bewail us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ne'ertheless I hope it is no crime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To laugh at <i>all</i> things—for I wish to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>What</i>, after <i>all</i>, are <i>all</i> things—but a <i>show</i>?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They accuse me—<i>Me</i>—the present writer of</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The present poem—of—I know not what—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tendency to under-rate and scoff</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At human power and virtue, and all that;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this they say in language rather rough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good God! I wonder what they would be at!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say no more than hath been said in Danté's</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Verse, and by Solomon and by Cervantes;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By Swift, by Machiavel, by Rochefoucault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Fénélon, by Luther, and by Plato;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Tillotson, and Wesley, and Rousseau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who knew this life was not worth a potato.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T is not their fault, nor mine, if this be so,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For my part, I pretend not to be Cato,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor even Diogenes.—We live and die,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But which is best, <i>you</i> know no more than I.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Socrates said, our only knowledge was<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"To know that nothing could be known;" a pleasant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Science enough, which levels to an ass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each man of wisdom, future, past, or present.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Newton (that proverb of the mind), alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Declared, with all his grand discoveries recent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he himself felt only "like a youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Picking up shells by the great ocean—Truth."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ecclesiastes said, "that all is vanity"—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most modern preachers say the same, or show it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their examples of true Christianity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In short, all know, or very soon may know it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in this scene of all-confessed inanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Saint, by Sage, by Preacher, and by Poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must I restrain me, through the fear of strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From holding up the nothingness of Life?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dogs, or men!—for I flatter you<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> in saying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ye are dogs—your betters far—ye may</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Read, or read not, what I am now essaying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show ye what ye are in every way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As little as the moon stops for the baying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wolves, will the bright Muse withdraw one ray</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out her skies—then howl your idle wrath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While she still silvers o'er your gloomy path.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Fierce loves and faithless wars"—I am not sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If this be the right reading—'t is no matter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fact's about the same, I am secure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sing them both, and am about to batter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A town which did a famous siege endure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was beleaguered both by land and water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Souvaroff,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> or Anglicè Suwarrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who loved blood as an alderman loves marrow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The fortress is called Ismail, and is placed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Danube's left branch and left bank,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With buildings in the Oriental taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But still a fortress of the foremost rank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or was at least, unless 't is since defaced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with your conquerors is a common prank:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It stands some eighty versts from the high sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And measures round of toises thousands three.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Within the extent of this fortification</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A borough is comprised along the height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the left, which from its loftier station</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commands the city, and upon its site</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Greek had raised around this elevation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A quantity of palisades <i>upright</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So placed as to <i>impede</i> the fire of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who held the place, and to <i>assist</i> the foe's.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This circumstance may serve to give a notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the high talents of this new Vauban:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the town ditch below was deep as Ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rampart higher than you'd wish to hang:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then there was a great want of precaution</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Prithee, excuse this engineering slang),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor work advanced, nor covered way was there,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hint, at least, "Here is no thoroughfare."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But a stone bastion, with a narrow gorge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And walls as thick as most skulls born as yet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two batteries, cap-à-pie, as our St. George,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Casemated<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> one, and t' other "a barbette,"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Danube's bank took formidable charge;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While two-and-twenty cannon duly set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rose over the town's right side, in bristling tier,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forty feet high, upon a cavalier.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But from the river the town's open quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the Turks could never be persuaded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Russian vessel e'er would heave in sight;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such their creed was till they were invaded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When it grew rather late to set things right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as the Danube could not well be waded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They looked upon the Muscovite flotilla,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And only shouted, "Allah!" and "Bis Millah!"</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Russians now were ready to attack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But oh, ye goddesses of War and Glory!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How shall I spell the name of each Cossacque</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were immortal, could one tell their story?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! what to their memory can lack?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Achilles' self was not more grim and gory</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than thousands of this new and polished nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose names want nothing but—pronunciation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Still I'll record a few, if but to increase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our euphony: there was Strongenoff, and Strokonoff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meknop, Serge Lwow, Arséniew of modern Greece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Tschitsshakoff, and Roguenoff, and Chokenoff,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others of twelve consonants apiece;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more might be found out, if I could poke enough</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into gazettes; but Fame (capricious strumpet),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seems, has got an ear as well as trumpet,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And cannot tune those discords of narration,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which may be names at Moscow, into rhyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet there were several worth commemoration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As e'er was virgin of a nuptial chime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft words, too, fitted for the peroration</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Londonderry drawling against time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ending in "ischskin," "ousckin," "iffskchy," "ouski,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whom we can insert but Rousamouski,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Scherematoff and Chrematoff, Koklophti,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Koclobski, Kourakin, and Mouskin Pouskin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All proper men of weapons, as e'er scoffed high<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against a foe, or ran a sabre through skin:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little cared they for Mahomet or Mufti,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless to make their kettle-drums a new skin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Out of their hides, if parchment had grown dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no more handy substitute been near.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then there were foreigners of much renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of various nations, and all volunteers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not fighting for their country or its crown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wishing to be one day brigadiers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also to have the sacking of a town;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pleasant thing to young men at their years.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'Mongst them were several Englishmen of pith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sixteen called Thomson, and nineteen named Smith.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Jack Thomson and Bill Thomson;—all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had been called <i>"Jemmy,"</i> after the great bard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I don't know whether they had arms or crest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But such a godfather's as good a card.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three of the Smiths were Peters; but the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst them all, hard blows to inflict or ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was <i>he</i>, since so renowned "in country quarters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Halifax;"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> but now he served the Tartars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The rest were Jacks and Gills and Wills and Bills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when I've added that the elder Jack Smith</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was born in Cumberland among the hills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that his father was an honest blacksmith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I've said all <i>I</i> know of a name that fills</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Three lines of the despatch in taking "Schmacksmith,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A village of Moldavia's waste, wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fell, immortal in a bulletin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I wonder (although Mars no doubt's a god I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Praise) if a man's name in a <i>bulletin</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>May make up for a <i>bullet in</i> his body?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hope this little question is no sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because, though I am but a simple noddy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think one Shakespeare puts the same thought in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mouth of some one in his plays so doting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which many people pass for wits by quoting.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then there were Frenchmen, gallant, young, and gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I'm too great a patriot to record</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their Gallic names upon a glorious day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I'd rather tell ten lies than say a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of truth;—such truths are treason; they betray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their country; and as traitors are abhorred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who name the French in English, save to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Peace should make John Bull the Frenchman's foe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Russians, having built two batteries on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An isle near Ismail, had two ends in view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first was to bombard it, and knock down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The public buildings and the private too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No matter what poor souls might be undone:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The city's shape suggested this, 't is true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Formed like an amphitheatre—each dwelling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presented a fine mark to throw a shell in.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The second object was to profit by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moment of the general consternation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To attack the Turk's flotilla, which lay nigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extremely tranquil, anchored at its station:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a third motive was as probably</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To frighten them into capitulation;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A phantasy which sometimes seizes warriors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless they are game as bull-dogs and fox-terriers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A habit rather blameable, which is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That of despising those we combat with,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Common in many cases, was in this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> of killing Tchitchitzkoff and Smith—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of the valorous "Smiths" whom we shall miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out of those nineteen who late rhymed to "pith;"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But 't is a name so spread o'er "Sir" and "Madam,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That one would think the <i>first</i> who bore it <i>"Adam."</i></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Russian batteries were incomplete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because they were constructed in a hurry;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the same cause which makes a verse want feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And throws a cloud o'er Longman and John Murray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When the sale of new books is not so fleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they who print them think is necessary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May likewise put off for a time what story</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes calls "Murder," and at others "Glory."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whether it was their engineer's stupidity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their haste or waste, I neither know nor care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or some contractor's personal cupidity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saving his soul by cheating in the ware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of homicide, but there was no solidity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the new batteries erected there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They either missed, or they were never missed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And added greatly to the missing list.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A sad miscalculation about distance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made all their naval matters incorrect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three fireships lost their amiable existence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before they reached a spot to take effect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The match was lit too soon, and no assistance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could remedy this lubberly defect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They blew up in the middle of the river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While, though 't was dawn, the Turks slept fast as ever.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At seven they rose, however, and surveyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Russ flotilla getting under way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T was nine, when still advancing undismayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within a cable's length their vessels lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off Ismail, and commenced a cannonade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was returned with interest, I may say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by a fire of musketry and grape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shells and shot of every size and shape.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For six hours bore they without intermission</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Turkish fire, and, aided by their own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Land batteries, worked their guns with great precision;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At length they found mere cannonade alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By no means would produce the town's submission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made a signal to retreat at one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One bark blew up, a second near the works</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Running aground, was taken by the Turks.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Moslem, too, had lost both ships and men;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when they saw the enemy retire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their Delhis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> manned some boats, and sailed again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And galled the Russians with a heavy fire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tried to make a landing on the main;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But here the effect fell short of their desire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Count Damas drove them back into the water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pell-mell, and with a whole gazette of slaughter.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"If" (says the historian here) "I could report</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that the Russians did upon this day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think that several volumes would fall short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I should still have many things to say;"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he says no more—but pays his court</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To some distinguished strangers in that fray;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Prince de Ligne, and Langeron, and Damas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Names great as any that the roll of Fame has.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This being the case, may show us what Fame <i>is</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For out of these three "<i>preux Chevaliers</i>," how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Many of common readers give a guess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That such existed? (and they may live now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For aught we know.) Renown's all hit or miss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There's fortune even in Fame, we must allow.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T is true, the Memoirs of the Prince de Ligne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have half withdrawn from <i>him</i> Oblivion's screen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But here are men who fought in gallant actions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As gallantly as ever heroes fought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But buried in the heap of such transactions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their names are rarely found, nor often sought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus even good fame may suffer sad contractions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is extinguished sooner than she ought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all our modern battles, I will bet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You can't repeat nine names from each Gazette.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In short, this last attack, though rich in glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showed that <i>somewhere, somehow</i>, there was a fault,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Admiral Ribas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> (known in Russian story)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Most strongly recommended an assault;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which he was opposed by young and hoary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made a long debate; but I must halt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if I wrote down every warrior's speech,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I doubt few readers e'er would mount the breach.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was a man, if that he was a man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not that his manhood could be called in question,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For had he not been Hercules, his span</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had been as short in youth as indigestion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made his last illness, when, all worn and wan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He died beneath a tree, as much unblest on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soil of the green province he had wasted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As e'er was locust on the land it blasted.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This was Potemkin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>—a great thing in days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When homicide and harlotry made great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If stars and titles could entail long praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His glory might half equal his estate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This fellow, being six foot high, could raise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A kind of phantasy proportionate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the then Sovereign of the Russian people,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who measured men as you would do a steeple.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While things were in abeyance, Ribas sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A courier to the Prince, and he succeeded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In ordering matters after his own bent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I cannot tell the way in which he pleaded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But shortly he had cause to be content.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the mean time, the batteries proceeded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fourscore cannon on the Danube's border</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were briskly fired and answered in due order.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But on the thirteenth, when already part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the troops were embarked, the siege to raise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A courier on the spur inspired new heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into all panters for newspaper praise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As well as dilettanti in War's art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his despatches (couched in pithy phrase)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Announcing the appointment of that lover of</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Battles to the command, Field-Marshal Souvaroff.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The letter of the Prince to the same Marshal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was worthy of a Spartan, had the cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Been one to which a good heart could be partial—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defence of freedom, country, or of laws;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as it was mere lust of Power to o'er-arch all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With its proud brow, it merits slight applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save for its style, which said, all in a trice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"You will take Ismail at whatever price."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Let there be Light! said God, and there was Light!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Let there be Blood!" says man, and there's a sea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fiat of this spoiled child of the Night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For Day ne'er saw his merits) could decree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More evil in an hour, than thirty bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Summers could renovate, though they should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovely as those which ripened Eden's fruit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For War cuts up not only branch, but root.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our friends, the Turks, who with loud "Allahs" now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to signalise the Russ retreat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were damnably mistaken; few are slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thinking that their enemy is beat,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Or <i>beaten</i>, if you insist on grammar, though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I never think about it in a heat,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here I say the Turks were much mistaken,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hating hogs, yet wished to save their bacon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For, on the sixteenth, at full gallop, drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In sight two horsemen, who were deemed Cossacques</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some time, till they came in nearer view:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had but little baggage at their backs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there were but <i>three</i> shirts between the two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But on they rode upon two Ukraine hacks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till, in approaching, were at length descried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this plain pair, Suwarrow and his guide.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Great joy to London now!" says some great fool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When London had a grand illumination,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which to that bottle-conjuror, John Bull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is of all dreams the first hallucination;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the streets of coloured lamps are full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sage (said John) surrenders at discretion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His purse, his soul, his sense, and even his nonsense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gratify, like a huge moth, this <i>one</i> sense.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>'T is strange that he should further "Damn his eyes,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they are damned; that once all-famous oath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is to the Devil now no further prize,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since John has lately lost the use of both.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Debt he calls Wealth, and taxes Paradise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Famine, with her gaunt and bony growth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which stare him in the face, he won't examine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or swears that Ceres hath begotten Famine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to the tale;—great joy unto the camp!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Russian, Tartar, English, French, Cossacque,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O'er whom Suwarrow shone like a gas lamp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Presaging a most luminous attack;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like a wisp along the marsh so damp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which leads beholders on a boggy walk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He flitted to and fro a dancing light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which all who saw it followed, wrong or right.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, certes, matters took a different face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was enthusiasm and much applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fleet and camp saluted with great grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all presaged good fortune to their cause.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within a cannot-shot length of the place</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They drew, constructed ladders, repaired flaws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In former works, made new, prepared fascines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all kinds of benevolent machines.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>'T is thus the spirit of a single mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes that of multitudes take one direction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As roll the waters to the breathing wind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or roams the herd beneath the bull's protection;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as a little dog will lead the blind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or a bell-wether form the flock's connection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By tinkling sounds, when they go forth to victual;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such is the sway of your great men o'er little.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The whole camp rung with joy; you would have thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they were going to a marriage feast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(This metaphor, I think, holds good as aught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since there is discord after both at least):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was not now a luggage boy but sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Danger and spoil with ardour much increased;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And why? because a little—odd—old man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stripped to his shirt, was come to lead the van.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But so it was; and every preparation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was made with all alacrity: the first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Detachment of three columns took its station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And waited but the signal's voice to burst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the foe: the second's ordination</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was also in three columns, with a thirst</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Glory gaping o'er a sea of Slaughter:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third, in columns two, attacked by water.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>New batteries were erected, and was held</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A general council, in which Unanimity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stranger to most councils, here prevailed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As sometimes happens in a great extremity;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And every difficulty being dispelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Glory began to dawn with due sublimity,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Souvaroff, determined to obtain it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was teaching his recruits to use the bayonet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is an actual fact, that he, commander</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In chief, in proper person deigned to drill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The awkward squad, and could afford to squander</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His time, a corporal's duty to fulfil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as you'd break a sucking salamander</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To swallow flame, and never take it ill:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He showed them how to mount a ladder (which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not like Jacob's) or to cross a ditch.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Also he dressed up, for the nonce, fascines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like men with turbans, scimitars, and dirks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made them charge with bayonet these machines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By way of lesson against actual Turks;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when well practised in these mimic scenes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He judged them proper to assail the works,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(At which your wise men sneered in phrases witty),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He made no answer—but he took the city.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Most things were in this posture on the eve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the assault, and all the camp was in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stern repose; which you would scarce conceive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet men resolved to dash through thick and thin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are very silent when they once believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all is settled:—there was little din,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some were thinking of their home and friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others of themselves and latter ends.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suwarrow chiefly was on the alert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surveying, drilling, ordering, jesting, pondering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the man was, we safely may assert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing to wonder at beyond most wondering;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hero, buffoon, half-demon, and half-dirt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Praying, instructing, desolating, plundering—Now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mars, now Momus—and when bent to storm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fortress, Harlequin in uniform.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The day before the assault, while upon drill—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this great conqueror played the corporal—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some Cossacques, hovering like hawks round a hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had met a party towards the Twilight's fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of whom spoke their tongue—or well or ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'T was much that he was understood at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whether from his voice, or speech, or manner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They found that he had fought beneath their banner.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whereon immediately at his request</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They brought him and his comrades to head-quarters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their dress was Moslem, but you might have guessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That these were merely masquerading Tartars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that beneath each Turkish-fashioned vest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lurked Christianity—which sometimes barters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her inward grace for outward show, and makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It difficult to shun some strange mistakes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suwarrow, who was standing in his shirt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before a company of Calmucks, drilling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exclaiming, fooling, swearing at the inert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lecturing on the noble art of killing,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For deeming human clay but common dirt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This great philosopher was thus instilling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His maxims,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> which to martial comprehension</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proved death in battle equal to a pension;—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suwarrow, when he saw this company</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Cossacques and their prey, turned round and cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon them his slow brow and piercing eye:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Whence come ye?"—"From Constantinople last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Captives just now escaped," was the reply.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"What are ye?"—"What you see us." Briefly passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This dialogue; for he who answered knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To whom he spoke, and made his words but few.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Your names?"—"Mine's Johnson, and my comrade's Juan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other two are women, and the third</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is neither man nor woman." The Chief threw on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The party a slight glance, then said, "I have heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Your</i> name before, the second is a new one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring the other three here was absurd:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let that pass:—I think I have heard your name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the Nikolaiew regiment?"—"The same."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"You served at Widdin?"—"Yes."—"You led the attack?"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"I did."—"What next?"—"I really hardly know"—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"You were the first i' the breach?"—"I was not slack</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least to follow those who might be so"—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"What followed?"—"A shot laid me on my back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I became a prisoner to the foe"—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"You shall have vengeance, for the town surrounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is twice as strong as that where you were wounded.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Where will you serve?"—"Where'er you please."—"I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You like to be the hope of the forlorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And doubtless would be foremost on the foe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After the hardships you've already borne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this young fellow—say what can he do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He with the beardless chin and garments torn?"—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Why, General, if he hath no greater fault</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In War than Love, he had better lead the assault"—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"He shall if that he dare." Here Juan bowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Low as the compliment deserved. Suwarrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Continued: "Your old regiment's allowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By special providence, to lead to-morrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, it may be, to-night, the assault: I have vowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To several Saints, that shortly plough or harrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall pass o'er what was Ismail, and its tusk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be unimpeded by the proudest mosque.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"So now, my lads, for Glory!"—Here he turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drilled away in the most classic Russian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until each high heroic bosom burned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For cash and conquest, as if from a cushion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A preacher had held forth (who nobly spurned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All earthly goods save tithes) and bade them push on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To slay the Pagans who resisted, battering</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The armies of the Christian Empress Catherine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Johnson, who knew by this long colloquy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself a favourite, ventured to address</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suwarrow, though engaged with accents high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his resumed amusement. "I confess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My debt in being thus allowed to die</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the foremost; but if you'd express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Explicitly our several posts, my friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And self would know what duty to attend."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"Right! I was busy, and forgot. Why, you</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will join your former regiment, which should be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now under arms. Ho! Katskoff, take him to"—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Here he called up a Polish orderly)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"His post, I mean the regiment Nikolaiew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stranger stripling may remain with me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He's a fine boy. The women may be sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the other baggage, or to the sick tent."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But here a sort of scene began to ensue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ladies,—who by no means had been bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be disposed of in a way so new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although their Harem education led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubtless, to that of doctrines the most true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passive obedience,—now raised up the head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With flashing eyes and starting tears, and flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their arms, as hens their wings about their young,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O'er the promoted couple of brave men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were thus honoured by the greatest Chief</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever peopled Hell with heroes slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or plunged a province or a realm in grief.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, foolish mortals! Always taught in vain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, glorious Laurel! since for one sole leaf</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of thine imaginary deathless tree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of blood and tears must flow the unebbing sea.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suwarrow, who had small regard for tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not much sympathy for blood, surveyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The women with their hair about their ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And natural agonies, with a slight shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feeling: for however Habit sears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men's hearts against whole millions, when their trade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is butchery, sometimes a single sorrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will touch even heroes—and such was Suwarrow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He said,—and in the kindest Calmuck tone,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Why, Johnson, what the devil do you mean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By bringing women here? They shall be shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All the attention possible, and seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In safety to the waggons, where alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fact they can be safe. You should have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aware this kind of baggage never thrives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save wed a year, I hate recruits with wives"—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"May it please your Excellency," thus replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our British friend, "these are the wives of others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not our own. I am too qualified</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By service with my military brothers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break the rules by bringing one's own bride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a camp: I know that nought so bothers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hearts of the heroic on a charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As leaving a small family at large.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"But these are but two Turkish ladies, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their attendant aided our escape,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And afterwards accompanied us through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand perils in this dubious shape.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me this kind of life is not so new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To them, poor things, it is an awkward scrape:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I therefore, if you wish me to fight freely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Request that they may both be used genteelly."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime these two poor girls, with swimming eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looked on as if in doubt if they could trust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their own protectors; nor was their surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Less than their grief (and truly not less just)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see an old man, rather wild than wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In aspect, plainly clad, besmeared with dust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stripped to his waistcoat, and that not too clean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More feared than all the Sultans ever seen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For everything seemed resting on his nod,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they could read in all eyes. Now to them,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who were accustomed, as a sort of god,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see the Sultan, rich in many a gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like an imperial peacock stalk abroad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That royal bird, whose tail's a diadem,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all the pomp of Power, it was a doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Power could condescend to do without.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>John Johnson, seeing their extreme dismay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though little versed in feelings oriental,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suggested some slight comfort in his way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Don Juan, who was much more sentimental,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swore they should see him by the dawn of day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that the Russian army should repent all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, strange to say, they found some consolation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this—for females like exaggeration.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then with tears, and sighs, and some slight kisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They parted for the present—these to await,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According to the artillery's hits or misses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What sages call Chance, Providence, or Fate—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Uncertainty is one of many blisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mortgage on Humanity's estate;)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>While their belovéd friends began to arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To burn a town which never did them harm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suwarrow,—who but saw things in the gross.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being much too gross to see them in detail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who calculated life as so much dross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as the wind a widowed nation's wail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cared as little for his army's loss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So that their efforts should at length prevail)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As wife and friends did for the boils of Job,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What was 't to him to hear two women sob?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nothing.—The work of Glory still went on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In preparations for a cannonade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As terrible as that of Ilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If Homer had found mortars ready made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, instead of slaying Priam's son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We only can but talk of escalade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bombs, drums, guns, bastions, batteries, bayonets, bullets—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard words, which stick in the soft Muses' gullets.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, thou eternal Homer! who couldst charm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All ears, though long; all ages, though so short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By merely wielding with poetic arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arms to which men will never more resort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless gunpowder should be found to harm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much less than is the hope of every court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which now is leagued young Freedom to annoy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they will not find Liberty a Troy:—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, thou eternal Homer! I have now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To paint a siege, wherein more men were slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With deadlier engines and a speedier blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than in thy Greek gazette of that campaign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet, like all men else, I must allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To vie with thee would be about as vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for a brook to cope with Ocean's flood,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still we moderns equal you in blood:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If not in poetry, at least in fact;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fact is Truth, the grand desideratum!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which, howe'er the Muse describes each act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There should be ne'ertheless a slight substratum.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now the town is going to be attacked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great deeds are doing—how shall I relate 'em?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Souls of immortal Generals! Phoebus watches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To colour up his rays from your despatches.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, ye great bulletins of Bonaparte!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, ye less grand long lists of killed and wounded!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shade of Leonidas, who fought so hearty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When my poor Greece was once, as now, surrounded!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, Cæsar's Commentaries! now impart, ye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shadows of Glory! (lest I be confounded),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A portion of your fading twilight hues—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So beautiful, so fleeting—to the Muse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When I call "fading" martial immortality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I mean, that every age and every year,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And almost every day, in sad reality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some sucking hero is compelled to rear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, when we come to sum up the totality</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of deeds to human happiness most dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turns out to be a butcher in great business,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Afflicting young folks with a sort of dizziness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Medals, rank, ribands, lace, embroidery, scarlet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are things immortal to immortal man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As purple to the Babylonian harlot;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An uniform to boys is like a fan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To women; there is scarce a crimson varlet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But deems himself the first in Glory's van.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Glory's glory; and if you would find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What <i>that</i> is—ask the pig who sees the wind!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At least <i>he feels it</i>, and some say he <i>sees</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he runs before it like a pig;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, if that simple sentence should displease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say, that he scuds before it like a brig,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A schooner, or—but it is time to ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This Canto, ere my Muse perceives fatigue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next shall ring a peal to shake all people,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a bob-major from a village steeple.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hark! through the silence of the cold, dull night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hum of armies gathering rank on rank!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! dusky masses steal in dubious sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the leaguered wall and bristling bank</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the armed river, while with straggling light</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The stars peep through the vapours dim and dank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which curl in various wreaths:—how soon the smoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Hell shall pall them in a deeper cloak!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-7-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here pause we for the present—as even then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That awful pause, dividing Life from Death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck for an instant on the hearts of men,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thousands of whom were drawing their last breath!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment—and all will be Life again!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The march! the charge! the shouts of either faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hurrah! and Allah! and one moment more—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death-cry drowning in the Battle's roar.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
