<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-4-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nothing so difficult as a beginning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In poesy, unless perhaps the end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For oftentimes when Pegasus seems winning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The race, he sprains a wing, and down we tend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Lucifer when hurled from Heaven for sinning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our sin the same, and hard as his to mend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being Pride,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-350" id="noteref-350" epub:type="noteref">350</a> which leads the mind to soar too far,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till our own weakness shows us what we are.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Time, which brings all beings to their level,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sharp Adversity, will teach at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man⁠—and, as we would hope⁠—perhaps the Devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neither of their intellects are vast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Youth’s hot wishes in our red veins revel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We know not this⁠—the blood flows on too fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as the torrent widens towards the Ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We ponder deeply on each past emotion.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-351" id="noteref-351" epub:type="noteref">351</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As boy, I thought myself a clever fellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wished that others held the same opinion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They took it up when my days grew more mellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And other minds acknowledged my dominion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now my sere Fancy “falls into the yellow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaf,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-352" id="noteref-352" epub:type="noteref">352</a> and Imagination droops her pinion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sad truth which hovers o’er my desk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turns what was once romantic to burlesque.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And if I laugh at any mortal thing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is that I may not weep; and if I weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is that our nature cannot always bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Itself to apathy, for we must steep<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-353" id="noteref-353" epub:type="noteref">353</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our hearts first in the depths of Lethe’s spring,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-354" id="noteref-354" epub:type="noteref">354</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ere what we least wish to behold will sleep:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thetis baptized her mortal son in Styx;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mortal mother would on Lethe fix.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some have accused me of a strange design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against the creed and morals of the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trace it in this poem every line:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I don’t pretend that I quite understand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My own meaning when I would be <em>very</em> fine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the fact is that I have nothing planned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless it were to be a moment merry⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A novel word in my vocabulary.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To the kind reader of our sober clime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This way of writing will appear exotic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pulci<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-355" id="noteref-355" epub:type="noteref">355</a> was sire of the half-serious rhyme,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-356" id="noteref-356" epub:type="noteref">356</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who sang when Chivalry was more quixotic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And revelled in the fancies of the time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True Knights, chaste Dames, huge Giants, Kings despotic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all these, save the last, being obsolete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I chose a modern subject as more meet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How I have treated it, I do not know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps no better than <em>they</em> have treated me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who have imputed such designs as show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not what they saw, but what they wished to see:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if it gives them pleasure, be it so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is a liberal age, and thoughts are free:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime Apollo plucks me by the ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tells me to resume my story here.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-357" id="noteref-357" epub:type="noteref">357</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Young Juan and his lady-love were left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To their own hearts’ most sweet society;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even Time the pitiless in sorrow cleft</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his rude scythe such gentle bosoms; he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighed to behold them of their hours bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though foe to Love; and yet they could not be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meant to grow old, but die in happy Spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before one charm or hope had taken wing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their faces were not made for wrinkles, their</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pure blood to stagnate, their great hearts to fail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blank grey was not made to blast their hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like the climes that know nor snow nor hail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were all summer; lightning might assail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shiver them to ashes, but to trail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A long and snake-like life of dull decay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not for them⁠—they had too little clay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They were alone once more; for them to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus was another Eden; they were never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weary, unless when separate: the tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cut from its forest root of years⁠—the river</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dammed from its fountain⁠—the child from the knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breast maternal weaned at once for ever⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would wither less than these two torn apart;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-358" id="noteref-358" epub:type="noteref">358</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! there is no instinct like the Heart⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Heart⁠—which may be broken: happy they!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrice fortunate! who of that fragile mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The precious porcelain of human clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Break with the first fall: they can ne’er behold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The long year linked with heavy day on day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all which must be borne, and never told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Life’s strange principle will often lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deepest in those who long the most to die.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Whom the gods love die young,” was said of yore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-359" id="noteref-359" epub:type="noteref">359</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And many deaths do they escape by this:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The death of friends, and that which slays even more⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The death of Friendship, Love, Youth, all that is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except mere breath; and since the silent shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Awaits at last even those who longest miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old Archer’s shafts, perhaps the early grave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-360" id="noteref-360" epub:type="noteref">360</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which men weep over may be meant to save.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Haidée and Juan thought not of the dead⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Heavens, and Earth, and Air, seemed made for them:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They found no fault with Time, save that he fled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They saw not in themselves aught to condemn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each was the other’s mirror, and but read</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joy sparkling in their dark eyes like a gem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew such brightness was but the reflection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of their exchanging glances of affection.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The gentle pressure, and the thrilling touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The least glance better understood than words,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which still said all, and ne’er could say too much;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A language,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-361" id="noteref-361" epub:type="noteref">361</a> too, but like to that of birds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Known but to them, at least appearing such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As but to lovers a true sense affords;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet playful phrases, which would seem absurd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who have ceased to hear such, or ne’er heard⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All these were theirs, for they were children still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And children still they should have ever been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were not made in the real world to fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A busy character in the dull scene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But like two beings born from out a rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Nymph and her belovéd, all unseen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pass their lives in fountains and on flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never know the weight of human hours.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Moons changing had rolled on, and changeless found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those their bright rise had lighted to such joys</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As rarely they beheld throughout their round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And these were not of the vain kind which cloys,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For theirs were buoyant spirits, never bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the mere senses; and that which destroys<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-362" id="noteref-362" epub:type="noteref">362</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most love⁠—possession⁠—unto them appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing which each endearment more endeared.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh beautiful! and rare as beautiful!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But theirs was Love in which the Mind delights</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lose itself, when the old world grows dull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And we are sick of its hack sounds and sights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Intrigues, adventures of the common school,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its petty passions, marriages, and flights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Hymen’s torch but brands one strumpet more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose husband only knows her not a whore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hard words⁠—harsh truth! a truth which many know.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enough.⁠—The faithful and the fairy pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who never found a single hour too slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What was it made them thus exempt from care?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young innate feelings all have felt below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which perish in the rest, but in them were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inherent⁠—what we mortals call romantic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And always envy, though we deem it frantic.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This is in others a factitious state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An opium dream<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-363" id="noteref-363" epub:type="noteref">363</a> of too much youth and reading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But was in them their nature or their fate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No novels e’er had set their young hearts bleeding,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-364" id="noteref-364" epub:type="noteref">364</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Haidée’s knowledge was by no means great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan was a boy of saintly breeding;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that there was no reason for their loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than for those of nightingales or doves.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They gazed upon the sunset; ’t is an hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear unto all, but dearest to <em>their</em> eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For it had made them what they were: the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Love had first o’erwhelmed them from such skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Happiness had been their only dower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Twilight saw them linked in Passion’s ties;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charmed with each other, all things charmed that brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The past still welcome as the present thought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know not why, but in that hour to-night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even as they gazed, a sudden tremor came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swept, as ’t were, across their hearts’ delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the wind o’er a harp-string, or a flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When one is shook in sound, and one in sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus some boding flashed through either frame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And called from Juan’s breast a faint low sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While one new tear arose in Haidée’s eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That large black prophet eye seemed to dilate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And follow far the disappearing sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if their last day of a happy date</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his broad, bright, and dropping orb were gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan gazed on her as to ask his fate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He felt a grief, but knowing cause for none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His glance inquired of hers for some excuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For feelings causeless, or at least abstruse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She turned to him, and smiled, but in that sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes not others smile; then turned aside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whatever feeling shook her, it seemed short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mastered by her wisdom or her pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Juan spoke, too⁠—it might be in sport⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this their mutual feeling, she replied⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If it should be so⁠—but⁠—it cannot be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or I at least shall not survive to see.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan would question further, but she pressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His lip to hers, and silenced him with this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then dismissed the omen from her breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Defying augury with that fond kiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no doubt of all methods ’t is the best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some people prefer wine⁠—’t is not amiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have tried both⁠—so those who would a part take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May choose between the headache and the heartache.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One of the two, according to your choice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Woman or wine, you’ll have to undergo;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both maladies are taxes on our joys:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But which to choose, I really hardly know;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if I had to give a casting voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For both sides I could many reasons show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then decide, without great wrong to either,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It were much better to have both than neither.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan and Haidée gazed upon each other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With swimming looks of speechless tenderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mixed all feelings⁠—friend, child, lover, brother⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that the best can mingle and express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When two pure hearts are poured in one another,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love too much, and yet can not love less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But almost sanctify the sweet excess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the immortal wish and power to bless.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Mixed in each other’s arms, and heart in heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why did they not then die?⁠—they had lived too long</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should an hour come to bid them breathe apart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Years could but bring them cruel things or wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World was not for them⁠—nor the World’s art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For beings passionate as Sappho’s song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love was born <em>with</em> them, <em>in</em> them, so intense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was their very Spirit⁠—not a sense.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They should have lived together deep in woods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unseen as sings the nightingale;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-365" id="noteref-365" epub:type="noteref">365</a> they were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unfit to mix in these thick solitudes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Called social, haunts of Hate, and Vice, and Care:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-366" id="noteref-366" epub:type="noteref">366</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>How lonely every freeborn creature broods!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sweetest song-birds nestle in a pair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eagle soars alone; the gull and crow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flock o’er their carrion, just like men below.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now pillowed cheek to cheek, in loving sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Haidée and Juan their siesta took,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gentle slumber, but it was not deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ever and anon a something shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan, and shuddering o’er his frame would creep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Haidée’s sweet lips murmured like a brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wordless music, and her face so fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stirred with her dream, as rose-leaves with the air.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-367" id="noteref-367" epub:type="noteref">367</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or as the stirring of a deep clear stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within an Alpine hollow, when the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Walks o’er it, was she shaken by the dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mystical Usurper of the mind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erpowering us to be whate’er may seem</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good to the soul which we no more can bind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange state of being! (for ’t is still to be)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Senseless to feel, and with sealed eyes to see.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-368" id="noteref-368" epub:type="noteref">368</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She dreamed of being alone on the sea-shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chained to a rock; she knew not how, but stir</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could not from the spot, and the loud roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew, and each wave rose roughly, threatening her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er her upper lip they seemed to pour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until she sobbed for breath, and soon they were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foaming o’er her lone head, so fierce and high⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each broke to drown her, yet she could not die.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Anon⁠—she was released, and then she strayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er the sharp shingles with her bleeding feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stumbled almost every step she made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And something rolled before her in a sheet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she must still pursue howe’er afraid:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T was white and indistinct, nor stopped to meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her glance nor grasp, for still she gazed and grasped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ran, but it escaped her as she clasped.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The dream changed:⁠—in a cave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-369" id="noteref-369" epub:type="noteref">369</a> she stood, its walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were hung with marble icicles; the work</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ages on its water-fretted halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where waves might wash, and seals might breed and lurk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hair was dripping, and the very balls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of her black eyes seemed turned to tears, and mirk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sharp rocks looked below each drop they caught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which froze to marble as it fell⁠—she thought.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-370" id="noteref-370" epub:type="noteref">370</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And wet, and cold, and lifeless at her feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale as the foam that frothed on his dead brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which she essayed in vain to clear, (how sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were once her cares, how idle seemed they now!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay Juan, nor could aught renew the beat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his quenched heart: and the sea dirges low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rang in her sad ears like a Mermaid’s song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that brief dream appeared a life too long.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And gazing on the dead, she thought his face</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Faded, or altered into something new⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to her Father’s features, till each trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More like and like to Lambro’s aspect grew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all his keen worn look and Grecian grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And starting, she awoke, and what to view?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! Powers of Heaven! what dark eye meets she there?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is⁠—’t is her Father’s⁠—fixed upon the pair!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then shrieking, she arose, and shrieking fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With joy and sorrow, hope and fear, to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom she deemed a habitant where dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ocean-buried, risen from death, to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perchance the death of one she loved too well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dear as her father had been to Haidée,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was a moment of that awful kind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen such⁠—but must not call to mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Up Juan sprang to Haidée’s bitter shriek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And caught her falling, and from off the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snatched down his sabre, in hot haste to wreak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vengeance on him who was the cause of all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then Lambro, who till now forbore to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smiled scornfully, and said, “Within my call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thousand scimitars await the word;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Put up, young man, put up your silly sword.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Haidée clung around him; “Juan, ’t is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’T is Lambro⁠—’t is my father! Kneel with me⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He will forgive us⁠—yes⁠—it must be⁠—yes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh! dearest father, in this agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pleasure and of pain⁠—even while I kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thy garment’s hem with transport, can it be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That doubt should mingle with my filial joy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deal with me as thou wilt, but spare this boy.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>High and inscrutable the old man stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Calm in his voice, and calm within his eye⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not always signs with him of calmest mood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He looked upon her, but gave no reply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then turned to Juan, in whose cheek the blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oft came and went, as there resolved to die;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In arms, at least, he stood, in act to spring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the first foe whom Lambro’s call might bring.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Young man, your sword;” so Lambro once more said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan replied, “Not while this arm is free.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The old man’s cheek grew pale, but not with dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And drawing from his belt a pistol he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied, “Your blood be then on your own head.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then looked close at the flint, as if to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was fresh⁠—for he had lately used the lock⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next proceeded quietly to cock.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It has a strange quick jar upon the ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cocking of a pistol, when you know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment more will bring the sight to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon your person, twelve yards off, or so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gentlemanly distance, not too near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If you have got a former friend for foe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But after being fired at once or twice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ear becomes more Irish, and less nice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lambro presented, and one instant more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had stopped this Canto, and Don Juan’s breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Haidée threw herself her boy before;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stern as her sire: “On me,” she cried, “let Death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Descend⁠—the fault is mine; this fatal shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He found⁠—but sought not. I have pledged my faith;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I love him⁠—I will die with him: I knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your nature’s firmness⁠—know your daughter’s too.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A minute past, and she had been all tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tenderness, and infancy; but now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She stood as one who championed human fears⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale, statue-like, and stern, she wooed the blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tall beyond her sex, and their compeers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She drew up to her height, as if to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fairer mark; and with a fixed eye scanned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Father’s face⁠—but never stopped his hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He gazed on her, and she on him; ’t was strange</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How like they looked! the expression was the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serenely savage, with a little change</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the large dark eye’s mutual-darted flame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she, too, was as one who could avenge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If cause should be⁠—a Lioness, though tame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Father’s blood before her Father’s face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boiled up, and proved her truly of his race.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I said they were alike, their features and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their stature, differing but in sex and years;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even to the delicacy of their hand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-371" id="noteref-371" epub:type="noteref">371</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was resemblance, such as true blood wears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now to see them, thus divided, stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fixed ferocity, when joyous tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sweet sensations should have welcomed both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shows what the passions are in their full growth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The father paused a moment, then withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His weapon, and replaced it; but stood still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And looking on her, as to look her through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Not <em>I</em>,” he said, “have sought this stranger’s ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not <em>I</em> have made this desolation: few</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would bear such outrage, and forbear to kill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I must do my duty⁠—how thou hast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Done thine, the present vouches for the past.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-372" id="noteref-372" epub:type="noteref">372</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Let him disarm; or, by my father’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own shall roll before you like a ball!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He raised his whistle, as the word he said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blew; another answered to the call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rushing in disorderly, though led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And armed from boot to turban, one and all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some twenty of his train came, rank on rank;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He gave the word⁠—“Arrest or slay the Frank.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, with a sudden movement, he withdrew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daughter; while compressed within his clasp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twixt her and Juan interposed the crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In vain she struggled in her father’s grasp⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His arms were like a serpent’s coil: then flew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their prey, as darts an angry asp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The file of pirates⁠—save the foremost, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fallen, with his right shoulder half cut through.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The second had his cheek laid open; but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third, a wary, cool old sworder, took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blows upon his cutlass, and then put</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own well in; so well, ere you could look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His man was floored, and helpless at his foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the blood running like a little brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From two smart sabre gashes, deep and red⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One on the arm, the other on the head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then they bound him where he fell, and bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan from the apartment: with a sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old Lambro bade them take him to the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where lay some ships which were to sail at nine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-373" id="noteref-373" epub:type="noteref">373</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They laid him in a boat, and plied the oar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until they reached some galliots, placed in line;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On board of one of these, and under hatches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They stowed him, with strict orders to the watches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The world is full of strange vicissitudes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here was one exceedingly unpleasant:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gentleman so rich in the world’s goods,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Handsome and young, enjoying all the present,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-374" id="noteref-374" epub:type="noteref">374</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just at the very time when he least broods</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On such a thing, is suddenly to sea sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wounded and chained, so that he cannot move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all because a lady fell in love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here I must leave him, for I grow pathetic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moved by the Chinese nymph of tears, green tea!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than whom Cassandra was not more prophetic;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For if my pure libations exceed three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I feel my heart become so sympathetic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I must have recourse to black Bohea:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is pity wine should be so deleterious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For tea and coffee leave us much more serious,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Unless when qualified with thee, Cogniac!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet Naïad of the Phlegethontic rill!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! why the liver wilt thou thus attack,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-375" id="noteref-375" epub:type="noteref">375</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make, like other nymphs, thy lovers ill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would take refuge in weak punch, but <em>rack</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(In each sense of the word), whene’er I fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My mild and midnight beakers to the brim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wakes me next morning with its synonym.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-376" id="noteref-376" epub:type="noteref">376</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I leave Don Juan for the present, safe⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not sound, poor fellow, but severely wounded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet could his corporal pangs amount to half</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those with which his Haidée’s bosom bounded?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was not one to weep, and rave, and chafe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then give way, subdued because surrounded;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her mother was a Moorish maid from Fez,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all is Eden, or a wilderness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There the large olive rains its amber store</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In marble fonts; there grain, and flower, and fruit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gush from the earth until the land runs o’er;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-377" id="noteref-377" epub:type="noteref">377</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But there, too, many a poison-tree has root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Midnight listens to the lion’s roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long, long deserts scorch the camel’s foot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or heaving whelm the helpless caravan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the soil is, so the heart of man.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Afric is all the Sun’s, and as her earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her human clay is kindled; full of power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For good or evil, burning from its birth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Moorish blood partakes the planet’s hour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And like the soil beneath it will bring forth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beauty and love were Haidée’s mother’s dower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But her large dark eye showed deep Passion’s force,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though sleeping like a lion near a source.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-378" id="noteref-378" epub:type="noteref">378</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her daughter, tempered with a milder ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like summer clouds all silvery, smooth, and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till slowly charged with thunder they display</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Terror to earth, and tempest to the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had held till now her soft and milky way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But overwrought with Passion and Despair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fire burst forth from her Numidian veins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even as the Simoom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-379" id="noteref-379" epub:type="noteref">379</a> sweeps the blasted plains.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The last sight which she saw was Juan’s gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he himself o’ermastered and cut down;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His blood was running on the very floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where late he trod, her beautiful, her own;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus much she viewed an instant and no more⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her struggles ceased with one convulsive groan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On her Sire’s arm, which until now scarce held</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her writhing, fell she like a cedar felled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A vein had burst, and her sweet lips’ pure dyes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-380" id="noteref-380" epub:type="noteref">380</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were dabbled with the deep blood which ran o’er;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-381" id="noteref-381" epub:type="noteref">381</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her head drooped, as when the lily lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’ercharged with rain: her summoned handmaids bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lady to her couch with gushing eyes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of herbs and cordials they produced their store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But she defied all means they could employ,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one Life could not hold, nor Death destroy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Days lay she in that state unchanged, though chill⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With nothing livid, still her lips were red;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had no pulse, but Death seemed absent still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No hideous sign proclaimed her surely dead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Corruption came not in each mind to kill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All hope; to look upon her sweet face bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New thoughts of Life, for it seemed full of soul⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had so much, Earth could not claim the whole.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The ruling passion, such as marble shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When exquisitely chiselled, still lay there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But fixed as marble’s unchanged aspect throws</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er the fair Venus, but for ever fair;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-382" id="noteref-382" epub:type="noteref">382</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the Laocoon’s all eternal throes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ever-dying Gladiator’s air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their energy like life forms all their fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet looks not life, for they are still the same.⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-383" id="noteref-383" epub:type="noteref">383</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She woke at length, but not as sleepers wake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather the dead, for Life seemed something new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A strange sensation which she must partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perforce, since whatsoever met her view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Struck not on memory, though a heavy ache</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay at her heart, whose earliest beat still true</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought back the sense of pain without the cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, for a while, the Furies made a pause.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She looked on many a face with vacant eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On many a token without knowing what:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saw them watch her without asking why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And recked not who around her pillow sat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not speechless, though she spoke not⁠—not a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Relieved her thoughts⁠—dull silence and quick chat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were tried in vain by those who served; she gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sign, save breath, of having left the grave.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her handmaids tended, but she heeded not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Father watched, she turned her eyes away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She recognised no being, and no spot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However dear or cherished in their day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They changed from room to room⁠—but all forgot⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gentle, but without memory she lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length those eyes, which they would fain be weaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to old thoughts, waxed full of fearful meaning.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then a slave bethought her of a harp;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The harper came, and tuned his instrument;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the first notes, irregular and sharp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him her flashing eyes a moment bent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then to the wall she turned as if to warp</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her thoughts from sorrow through her heart re-sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he began a long low island-song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of ancient days, ere Tyranny grew strong.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Anon her thin wan fingers beat the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In time to his old tune: he changed the theme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sung of Love; the fierce name struck through all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her recollection; on her flashed the dream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what she was, and is, if ye could call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be so being; in a gushing stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tears rushed forth from her o’erclouded brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like mountain mists at length dissolved in rain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Short solace, vain relief!⁠—Thought came too quick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whirled her brain to madness; she arose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one who ne’er had dwelt among the sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flew at all she met, as on her foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no one ever heard her speak or shriek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although her paroxysm drew towards its close;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hers was a frenzy which disdained to rave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even when they smote her, in the hope to save.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet she betrayed at times a gleam of sense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing could make her meet her Father’s face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though on all other things with looks intense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gazed, but none she ever could retrace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Food she refused, and raiment; no pretence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Availed for either; neither change of place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor time, nor skill, nor remedy, could give her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Senses to sleep⁠—the power seemed gone for ever.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Twelve days and nights she withered thus; at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a groan, or sigh, or glance, to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A parting pang, the spirit from her passed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they who watched her nearest could not know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very instant, till the change that cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her sweet face into shadow, dull and slow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-384" id="noteref-384" epub:type="noteref">384</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glazed o’er her eyes⁠—the beautiful, the black⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! to possess such lustre⁠—and then lack!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She died, but not alone; she held, within,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A second principle of Life, which might</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have dawned a fair and sinless child of sin;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-385" id="noteref-385" epub:type="noteref">385</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But closed its little being without light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And went down to the grave unborn, wherein</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blossom and bough lie withered with one blight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain the dews of Heaven descend above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The bleeding flower and blasted fruit of Love.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus lived⁠—thus died she; never more on her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall Sorrow light, or Shame. She was not made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through years or moons the inner weight to bear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which colder hearts endure till they are laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By age in earth: her days and pleasures were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brief, but delightful⁠—such as had not staid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long with her destiny; but she sleeps well<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-386" id="noteref-386" epub:type="noteref">386</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By the sea-shore, whereon she loved to dwell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That isle is now all desolate and bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its dwellings down, its tenants passed away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None but her own and Father’s grave is there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And nothing outward tells of human clay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye could not know where lies a thing so fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No stone is there to show, no tongue to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What was; no dirge, except the hollow sea’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-387" id="noteref-387" epub:type="noteref">387</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mourns o’er the beauty of the Cyclades.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But many a Greek maid in a loving song</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sighs o’er her name; and many an islander</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her Sire’s story makes the night less long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Valour was his, and Beauty dwelt with her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she loved rashly, her life paid for wrong⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A heavy price must all pay who thus err,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some shape; let none think to fly the danger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For soon or late Love is his own avenger.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But let me change this theme, which grows too sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lay this sheet of sorrows on the shelf;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I don’t much like describing people mad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fear of seeming rather touched myself⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, I’ve no more on this head to add;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as my Muse is a capricious elf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We’ll put about, and try another tack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Juan, left half-killed some stanzas back.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wounded and fettered, “cabined, cribbed, confined,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-388" id="noteref-388" epub:type="noteref">388</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some days and nights elapsed before that he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could altogether call the past to mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when he did, he found himself at sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sailing six knots an hour before the wind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shores of Ilion lay beneath their lee⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another time he might have liked to see ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now was not much pleased with Cape Sigeum.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There, on the green and village-cotted hill, is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Flanked by the Hellespont, and by the sea)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Entombed the bravest of the brave, Achilles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They say so⁠—(Bryant<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-389" id="noteref-389" epub:type="noteref">389</a> says the contrary):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And further downward, tall and towering still, is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tumulus⁠—of whom? Heaven knows! ’t may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Patroclus, Ajax, or Protesilaus⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All heroes, who if living still would slay us.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-390" id="noteref-390" epub:type="noteref">390</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>High barrows, without marble, or a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A vast, untilled, and mountain-skirted plain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-391" id="noteref-391" epub:type="noteref">391</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Ida in the distance, still the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And old Scamander (if ’t is he) remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The situation seems still formed for fame⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A hundred thousand men might fight again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With ease; but where I sought for Ilion’s walls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quiet sheep feeds, and the tortoise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-392" id="noteref-392" epub:type="noteref">392</a> crawls;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-393" id="noteref-393" epub:type="noteref">393</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Troops of untended horses; here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some little hamlets, with new names uncouth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some shepherds (unlike Paris) led to stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moment at the European youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom to the spot their school-boy feelings bear;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-394" id="noteref-394" epub:type="noteref">394</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Turk, with beads in hand, and pipe in mouth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extremely taken with his own religion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are what I found there⁠—but the devil a Phrygian.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan, here permitted to emerge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his dull cabin, found himself a slave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forlorn, and gazing on the deep blue surge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’ershadowed there by many a Hero’s grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weak still with loss of blood, he scarce could urge</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A few brief questions; and the answers gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No very satisfactory information</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About his past or present situation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He saw some fellow captives, who appeared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be Italians (as they were in fact)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From them, at least, <em>their</em> destiny he heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was an odd one; a troop going to act</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Sicily⁠—all singers, duly reared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their vocation, had not been attacked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In sailing from Livorno by the pirate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sold by the impresario at no high rate.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-395" id="noteref-395" epub:type="noteref">395</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By one of these, the buffo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-396" id="noteref-396" epub:type="noteref">396</a> of the party,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan was told about their curious case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For although destined to the Turkish mart, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still kept his spirits up⁠—at least his face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The little fellow really looked quite hearty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bore him with some gaiety and grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showing a much more reconciled demeanour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than did the prima donna and the tenor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In a few words he told their hapless story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saying, “Our Machiavelian impresario,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making a signal off some promontory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hailed a strange brig⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship" xml:lang="it">Corpo di Caio Mario</i>!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We were transferred on board her in a hurry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a single scudo of <i xml:lang="it">salario</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if the Sultan has a taste for song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We will revive our fortunes before long.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The prima donna, though a little old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And haggard with a dissipated life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And subject, when the house is thin, to cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has some good notes; and then the tenor’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With no great voice, is pleasing to behold;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Last carnival she made a deal of strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By carrying off Count Cesare Cicogna</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From an old Roman Princess at Bologna.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And then there are the dancers; there’s the Nini,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With more than one profession gains by all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there’s that laughing slut the Pelegrini,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She, too, was fortunate last Carnival,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made at least five hundred good <i xml:lang="it">zecchini</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But spends so fast, she has not now a paul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then there’s the Grotesca⁠—such a dancer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where men have souls or bodies she must answer.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“As for the <i xml:lang="it">figuranti</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-397" id="noteref-397" epub:type="noteref">397</a> they are like</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest of all that tribe; with here and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pretty person, which perhaps may strike⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rest are hardly fitted for a fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s one, though tall and stiffer than a pike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet has a sentimental kind of air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which might go far, but she don’t dance with vigour⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more’s the pity, with her face and figure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“As for the men, they are a middling set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The <i xml:lang="it">musico</i> is but a cracked old basin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, being qualified in one way yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May the seraglio do to set his face in,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-398" id="noteref-398" epub:type="noteref">398</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as a servant some preferment get;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His singing I no further trust can place in:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From all the Pope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-399" id="noteref-399" epub:type="noteref">399</a> makes yearly ’t would perplex</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find three perfect pipes of the <em>third</em> sex.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The tenor’s voice is spoilt by affectation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for the bass, the beast can only bellow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fact, he had no singing education,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An ignorant, noteless, timeless, tuneless fellow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being the prima donna’s near relation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who swore his voice was very rich and mellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hired him, though to hear him you’d believe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ass was practising recitative.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’T would not become myself to dwell upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My own merits, and though young⁠—I see, Sir⁠—you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have got a travelled air, which speaks you one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To whom the opera is by no means new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ve heard of Raucocanti?⁠—I’m the man;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The time may come when you may hear me too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You was<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-400" id="noteref-400" epub:type="noteref">400</a> not last year at the fair of Lugo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But next, when I’m engaged to sing there⁠—do go.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Our baritone I almost had forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pretty lad, but bursting with conceit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With graceful action, science not a jot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A voice of no great compass, and not sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He always is complaining of his lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forsooth, scarce fit for ballads in the street;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lovers’ parts his passion more to breathe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having no heart to show, he shows his teeth.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-401" id="noteref-401" epub:type="noteref">401</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here Raucocanti’s eloquent recital</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was interrupted by the pirate crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who came at stated moments to invite all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The captives back to their sad berths; each threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rueful glance upon the waves, (which bright all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the blue skies derived a double blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dancing all free and happy in the sun,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then went down the hatchway one by one.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They heard next day⁠—that in the Dardanelles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waiting for his Sublimity’s firman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-402" id="noteref-402" epub:type="noteref">402</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most imperative of sovereign spells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which everybody does without who can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More to secure them in their naval cells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lady to lady, well as man to man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were to be chained and lotted out per couple,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the slave market of Constantinople.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It seems when this allotment was made out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There chanced to be an odd male, and odd female,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who (after some discussion and some doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If the soprano might be deemed to be male,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They placed him o’er the women as a scout)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were linked together, and it happened the male</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Juan⁠—who, an awkward thing at his age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paired off with a Bacchante blooming visage.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With Raucocanti lucklessly was chained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tenor; these two hated with a hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Found only on the stage, and each more pained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With this his tuneful neighbour than his fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad strife arose, for they were so cross-grained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of bearing up without debate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That each pulled different ways with many an oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Arcades ambo</i>,” <i xml:lang="la">id est</i>⁠—blackguards both.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-403" id="noteref-403" epub:type="noteref">403</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan’s companion was a Romagnole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But bred within the march of old Ancona,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eyes that looked into the very soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(And other chief points of a <i xml:lang="it">bella donna</i>),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright⁠—and as black and burning as a coal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through her clear brunette complexion shone a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great wish to please⁠—a most attractive dower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Especially when added to the power.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But all that power was wasted upon him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Sorrow o’er each sense held stern command;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eye might flash on his, but found it dim:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though thus chained, as natural her hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Touched his, nor that⁠—nor any handsome limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(And she had some not easy to withstand)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could stir his pulse, or make his faith feel brittle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps his recent wounds might help a little.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No matter; we should ne’er too much inquire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But facts are facts: no Knight could be more true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And firmer faith no Ladye-love desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We will omit the proofs, save one or two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is said no one in hand “can hold a fire</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By thought of frosty Caucasus”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-404" id="noteref-404" epub:type="noteref">404</a>⁠—but few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I really think⁠—yet Juan’s then ordeal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was more triumphant, and not much less real.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here I might enter on a chaste description,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having withstood temptation in my youth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-405" id="noteref-405" epub:type="noteref">405</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But hear that several people take exception</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the first two books having too much truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I’ll make Don Juan leave the ship soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the publisher declares, in sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through needles’ eyes it easier for the camel is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pass, than those two cantos into families.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’T is all the same to me; I’m fond of yielding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore leave them to the purer page</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Smollett, Prior, Ariosto, Fielding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who say strange things for so correct an age;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-406" id="noteref-406" epub:type="noteref">406</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I once had great alacrity in wielding</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My pen, and liked poetic war to wage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And recollect the time when all this cant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would have provoked remarks⁠—which now it shan’t.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As boys love rows, my boyhood liked a squabble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But at this hour I wish to part in peace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving such to the literary rabble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether my verse’s fame be doomed to cease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the right hand which wrote it still is able,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or of some centuries to take a lease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grass upon my grave will grow as long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sigh to midnight winds, but not to song.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of poets who come down to us through distance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of time and tongues, the foster-babes of Fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life seems the smallest portion of existence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where twenty ages gather o’er a name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T is as a snowball which derives assistance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From every flake, and yet rolls on the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even till an iceberg it may chance to grow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, after all, ’t is nothing but cold snow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And so great names are nothing more than nominal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And love of Glory’s but an airy lust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too often in its fury overcoming all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who would as ’t were identify their dust</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the wide destruction, which, entombing all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Leaves nothing till “the coming of the just”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save change: I’ve stood upon Achilles’ tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heard Troy doubted;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-407" id="noteref-407" epub:type="noteref">407</a> Time will doubt of Rome.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The very generations of the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are swept away, and tomb inherits tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the memory of an Age is fled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, buried, sinks beneath its offspring’s doom:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are the epitaphs our fathers read?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save a few gleaned from the sepulchral gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which once-named myriads nameless lie beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lose their own in universal Death.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I canter by the spot each afternoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where perished in his fame the hero-boy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lived too long for men, but died too soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For human vanity, the young De Foix!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A broken pillar, not uncouthly hewn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But which Neglect is hastening to destroy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Records Ravenna’s carnage on its face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While weeds and ordure rankle round the base.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-408" id="noteref-408" epub:type="noteref">408</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I pass each day where Dante’s bones are laid:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-409" id="noteref-409" epub:type="noteref">409</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little cupola, more neat than solemn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Protects his dust, but reverence here is paid<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-410" id="noteref-410" epub:type="noteref">410</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the Bard’s tomb, and not the Warrior’s column:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time must come, when both alike decayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Chieftain’s trophy, and the Poet’s volume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will sink where lie the songs and wars of earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before Pelides’ death, or Homer’s birth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With human blood that column was cemented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With human filth that column is defiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if the peasant’s coarse contempt were vented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show his loathing of the spot he soiled:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-411" id="noteref-411" epub:type="noteref">411</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus is the trophy used, and thus lamented</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should ever be those blood-hounds, from whose wild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instinct of gore and glory Earth has known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those sufferings Dante saw in Hell alone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-412" id="noteref-412" epub:type="noteref">412</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet there will still be bards: though Fame is smoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its fumes are frankincense to human thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the unquiet feelings, which first woke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Song in the world, will seek what then they sought;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-413" id="noteref-413" epub:type="noteref">413</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As on the beach the waves at last are broke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus to their extreme verge the passions brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dash into poetry, which is but Passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or, at least, was so ere it grew a fashion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If in the course of such a life as was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At once adventurous and contemplative,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men who partake all passions as they pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Acquire the deep and bitter power to give<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-414" id="noteref-414" epub:type="noteref">414</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their images again as in a glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in such colours that they seem to live;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may do right forbidding them to show ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But spoil (I think) a very pretty poem.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-415" id="noteref-415" epub:type="noteref">415</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! ye, who make the fortunes of all books!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Benign Ceruleans of the second sex!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who advertise new poems by your looks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your “Imprimatur” will ye not annex?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What! must I go to the oblivious cooks,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-416" id="noteref-416" epub:type="noteref">416</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those Cornish plunderers of Parnassian wrecks?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! must I then the only minstrel be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proscribed from tasting your Castalian tea!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-417" id="noteref-417" epub:type="noteref">417</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What! can I prove “a lion” then no more?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A ball-room bard, a foolscap, hot-press darling?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear the compliments of many a bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sigh, “I can’t get out,” like Yorick’s starling;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-418" id="noteref-418" epub:type="noteref">418</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why then I’ll swear, as poet Wordy swore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Because the world won’t read him, always snarling),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Taste is gone, that Fame is but a lottery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drawn by the blue-coat misses of a coterie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-419" id="noteref-419" epub:type="noteref">419</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! “darkly, deeply, beautifully blue,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-420" id="noteref-420" epub:type="noteref">420</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As some one somewhere sings about the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I, ye learnéd ladies, say of you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They say your stockings are so⁠—(Heaven knows why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have examined few pair of that hue);</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blue as the garters which serenely lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round the Patrician left-legs, which adorn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The festal midnight, and the levee morn.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-421" id="noteref-421" epub:type="noteref">421</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet some of you are most seraphic creatures⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But times are altered since, a rhyming lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You read my stanzas, and I read your features:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And⁠—but no matter, all those things are over;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still I have no dislike to learnéd natures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For sometimes such a world of virtues cover;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knew one woman of that purple school,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loveliest, chastest, best, but⁠—quite a fool.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-422" id="noteref-422" epub:type="noteref">422</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-112">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Humboldt, “the first of travellers,” but not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last, if late accounts be accurate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invented, by some name I have forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As well as the sublime discovery’s date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An airy instrument, with which he sought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To ascertain the atmospheric state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By measuring “the <em>intensity of blue</em>:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-423" id="noteref-423" epub:type="noteref">423</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, Lady Daphne! let me measure you!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-424" id="noteref-424" epub:type="noteref">424</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-113">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to the narrative:⁠—The vessel bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With slaves to sell off in the capital,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the usual process, might be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At anchor under the seraglio wall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her cargo, from the plague being safe and sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were landed in the market,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-425" id="noteref-425" epub:type="noteref">425</a> one and all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, there, with Georgians, Russians, and Circassians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bought up for different purposes and passions.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-114">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some went off dearly; fifteen hundred dollars</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For one Circassian, a sweet girl, were given,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warranted virgin; Beauty’s brightest colours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had decked her out in all the hues of heaven:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her sale sent home some disappointed bawlers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who bade on till the hundreds reached eleven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when the offer went beyond, they knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T was for the Sultan, and at once withdrew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-115">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Twelve negresses from Nubia brought a price</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which the West Indian market scarce could bring⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Wilberforce, at last, has made it twice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What ’t was ere Abolition; and the thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Need not seem very wonderful, for Vice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is always much more splendid than a King:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Virtues, even the most exalted, Charity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are saving⁠—Vice spares nothing for a rarity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-116">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But for the destiny of this young troop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How some were bought by Pachas, some by Jews,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How some to burdens were obliged to stoop,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others rose to the command of crews</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As renegadoes; while in hapless group,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hoping no very old Vizier might choose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The females stood, as one by one they picked ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make a mistress, or fourth wife, or victim:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-426" id="noteref-426" epub:type="noteref">426</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-4-117">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All this must be reserved for further song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Also our Hero’s lot, howe’er unpleasant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Because this Canto has become too long),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-427" id="noteref-427" epub:type="noteref">427</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must be postponed discreetly for the present;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m sensible redundancy is wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could not for the Muse of me put less in ’t:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now delay the progress of Don Juan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till what is called in Ossian the fifth Duan.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<footer>
				<p>Written <time datetime="1819-11"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 1819</time>. Copied <time datetime="1820-01">January, 1820</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
