<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-2-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh ye! who teach the ingenuous youth of nations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Holland, France, England, Germany, or Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I pray ye flog them upon all occasions⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It mends their morals, never mind the pain:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The best of mothers and of educations</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Juan’s case were but employed in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since, in a way that’s rather of the oddest, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Became divested of his native modesty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Had he but been placed at a public school,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the third form, or even in the fourth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His daily task had kept his fancy cool,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least, had he been nurtured in the North;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spain may prove an exception to the rule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then exceptions always prove its worth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lad of sixteen causing a divorce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Puzzled his tutors very much, of course.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I can’t say that it puzzles me at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If all things be considered: first, there was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His lady-mother, mathematical,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A⁠—never mind;⁠—his tutor, an old ass;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pretty woman⁠—(that’s quite natural,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or else the thing had hardly come to pass)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A husband rather old, not much in unity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his young wife⁠—a time, and opportunity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well⁠—well; the World must turn upon its axis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all Mankind turn with it, heads or tails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And live and die, make love and pay our taxes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as the veering wind shifts, shift our sails;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The King commands us, and the Doctor quacks us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Priest instructs, and so our life exhales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little breath, love, wine, ambition, fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fighting, devotion, dust⁠—perhaps a name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I said that Juan had been sent to Cadiz⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pretty town, I recollect it well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis there the mart of the colonial trade is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Or was, before Peru learned to rebel),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such sweet girls!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a>⁠—I mean, such graceful ladies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their very walk would make your bosom swell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can’t describe it, though so much it strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor liken it⁠—I never saw the like:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An Arab horse, a stately stag, a barb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New broke, a camelopard, a gazelle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No⁠—none of these will do;⁠—and then their garb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their veil and petticoat⁠—Alas! to dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon such things would very near absorb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A canto⁠—then their feet and ankles⁠—well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thank Heaven I’ve got no metaphor quite ready,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(And so, my sober Muse⁠—come, let’s be steady⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Chaste Muse!⁠—well⁠—if you must, you must)⁠—the veil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thrown back a moment with the glancing hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the o’erpowering eye, that turns you pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flashes into the heart:⁠—All sunny land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Love! when I forget you, may I fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To⁠—say my prayers⁠—but never was there planned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dress through which the eyes give such a volley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excepting the Venetian <i xml:lang="it">Fazzioli</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to our tale: the Donna Inez sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her son to Cadiz only to embark;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stay there had not answered her intent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But why?⁠—we leave the reader in the dark⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas for a voyage the young man was meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if a Spanish ship were Noah’s ark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To wean him from the wickedness of earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And send him like a Dove of Promise forth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan bade his valet pack his things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According to direction, then received</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lecture and some money: for four springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was to travel; and though Inez grieved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As every kind of parting has its stings),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hoped he would improve⁠—perhaps believed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A letter, too, she gave (he never read it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of good advice⁠—and two or three of credit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the mean time, to pass her hours away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brave Inez now set up a Sunday school</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For naughty children, who would rather play</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Like truant rogues) the devil, or the fool;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infants of three years old were taught that day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dunces were whipped, or set upon a stool:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The great success of Juan’s education</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spurred her to teach another generation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan embarked⁠—the ship got under way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wind was fair, the water passing rough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A devil of a sea rolls in that bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I, who’ve crossed it oft, know well enough;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, standing on the deck, the dashing spray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flies in one’s face, and makes it weather-tough:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there he stood to take, and take again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His first⁠—perhaps his last⁠—farewell of Spain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I can’t but say it is an awkward sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see one’s native land receding through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The growing waters; it unmans one quite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially when life is rather new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I recollect Great Britain’s coast looks white,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But almost every other country’s blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When gazing on them, mystified by distance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We enter on our nautical existence.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So Juan stood, bewildered on the deck:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wind sung, cordage strained, and sailors swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the ship creaked, the town became a speck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From which away so fair and fast they bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The best of remedies is a beef-steak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against sea-sickness: try it, Sir, before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You sneer, and I assure you this is true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I have found it answer⁠—so may you.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan stood, and, gazing from the stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beheld his native Spain receding far:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First partings form a lesson hard to learn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even nations feel this when they go to war;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a sort of unexpressed concern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A kind of shock that sets one’s heart ajar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At leaving even the most unpleasant people</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And places⁠—one keeps looking at the steeple.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan had got many things to leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His mother, and a mistress, and no wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that he had much better cause to grieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than many persons more advanced in life:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if we now and then a sigh must heave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At quitting even those we quit in strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt we weep for those the heart endears⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is, till deeper griefs congeal our tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So Juan wept, as wept the captive Jews</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Babel’s waters, still remembering Zion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’d weep⁠—but mine is not a weeping Muse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such light griefs are not a thing to die on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young men should travel, if but to amuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Themselves; and the next time their servants tie on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind their carriages their new portmanteau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps it may be lined with this my canto.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Juan wept, and much he sighed and thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While his salt tears dropped into the salt sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sweets to the sweet;” (I like so much to quote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You must excuse this extract⁠—’tis where she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Queen of Denmark, for Ophelia brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flowers to the grave;) and, sobbing often, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reflected on his present situation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seriously resolved on reformation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Farewell, my Spain! a long farewell!” he cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Perhaps I may revisit thee no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But die, as many an exiled heart hath died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of its own thirst to see again thy shore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell, where Guadalquivir’s waters glide!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farewell, my mother! and, since all is o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farewell, too, dearest Julia!⁠—(here he drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her letter out again, and read it through.)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And oh! if e’er I should forget, I swear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that’s impossible, and cannot be⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sooner shall this blue Ocean melt to air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sooner shall Earth resolve itself to sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I resign thine image, oh, my fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or think of anything, excepting thee;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mind diseased no remedy can physic⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Here the ship gave a lurch, and he grew sea-sick.)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Sooner shall Heaven kiss earth⁠—(here he fell sicker)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, Julia! what is every other woe?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For God’s sake let me have a glass of liquor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pedro, Battista, help me down below.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Julia, my love!⁠—(you rascal, Pedro, quicker)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh, Julia!⁠—(this curst vessel pitches so)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Belovéd Julia, hear me still beseeching!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Here he grew inarticulate with retching.)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He felt that chilling heaviness of heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rather stomach, which, alas! attends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond the best apothecary’s art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loss of Love, the treachery of friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or death of those we dote on, when a part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of us dies with them as each fond hope ends:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt he would have been much more pathetic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the sea acted as a strong emetic.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Love’s a capricious power: I’ve known it hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Out through a fever caused by its own heat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But be much puzzled by a cough and cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And find a quinsy very hard to treat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against all noble maladies he’s bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But vulgar illnesses don’t like to meet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor that a sneeze should interrupt his sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor inflammations redden his blind eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But worst of all is nausea, or a pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the lower region of the bowels;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, who heroically breathes a vein,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shrinks from the application of hot towels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And purgatives are dangerous to his reign,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sea-sickness death: his love was perfect, how else<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could Juan’s passion, while the billows roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resist his stomach, ne’er at sea before?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The ship, called the most holy “Trinidada,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was steering duly for the port Leghorn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there the Spanish family Moncada</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were settled long ere Juan’s sire was born:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were relations, and for them he had a</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Letter of introduction, which the morn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his departure had been sent him by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Spanish friends for those in Italy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His suite consisted of three servants and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A tutor, the licentiate Pedrillo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who several languages did understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now lay sick and speechless on his pillow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, rocking in his hammock, longed for land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His headache being increased by every billow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the waves oozing through the port-hole made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His berth a little damp, and him afraid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas not without some reason, for the wind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Increased at night, until it blew a gale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though ’twas not much to a naval mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some landsmen would have looked a little pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For sailors are, in fact, a different kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At sunset they began to take in sail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the sky showed it would come on to blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And carry away, perhaps, a mast or so.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At one o’clock the wind with sudden shift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw the ship right into the trough of the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which struck her aft, and made an awkward rift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Started the stern-post, also shattered the</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whole of her stern-frame, and, ere she could lift</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herself from out her present jeopardy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rudder tore away: ’twas time to sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pumps, and there were four feet water found.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One gang of people instantly was put</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the pumps, and the remainder set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To get up part of the cargo, and what not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they could not come at the leak as yet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last they did get at it really, but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still their salvation was an even bet:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The water rushed through in a way quite puzzling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While they thrust sheets, shirts, jackets, bales of muslin,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Into the opening; but all such ingredients</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would have been vain, and they must have gone down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despite of all their efforts and expedients,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for the pumps: I’m glad to make them known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To all the brother tars who may have need hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For fifty tons of water were upthrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By them per hour, and they had all been undone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for the maker, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mann, of London.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As day advanced the weather seemed to abate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then the leak they reckoned to reduce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And keep the ship afloat, though three feet yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept two hand⁠—and one chain-pump still in use.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind blew fresh again: as it grew late</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A squall came on, and while some guns broke loose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gust⁠—which all descriptive power transcends⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Laid with one blast the ship on her beam ends.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There she lay, motionless, and seemed upset;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The water left the hold, and washed the decks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made a scene men do not soon forget;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they remember battles, fires, and wrecks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or any other thing that brings regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or breaks their hopes, or hearts, or heads, or necks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus drownings are much talked of by the divers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And swimmers, who may chance to be survivors.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Immediately the masts were cut away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both main and mizen; first the mizen went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The main-mast followed: but the ship still lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like a mere log, and baffled our intent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foremast and bowsprit were cut down, and they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eased her at last (although we never meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To part with all till every hope was blighted),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then with violence the old ship righted.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It may be easily supposed, while this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was going on, some people were unquiet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That passengers would find it much amiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lose their lives, as well as spoil their diet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even the able seaman, deeming his</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Days nearly o’er, might be disposed to riot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As upon such occasions tars will ask</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For grog, and sometimes drink rum from the cask.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There’s nought, no doubt, so much the spirit calms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As rum and true religion: thus it was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some plundered, some drank spirits, some sung psalms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The high wind made the treble, and as bass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hoarse harsh waves kept time; fright cured the qualms</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the luckless landsmen’s sea-sick maws:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange sounds of wailing, blasphemy, devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clamoured in chorus to the roaring Ocean.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps more mischief had been done, but for<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our Juan, who, with sense beyond his years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Got to the spirit-room, and stood before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It with a pair of pistols;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> and their fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if Death were more dreadful by his door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fire than water, spite of oaths and tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept still aloof the crew, who, ere they sunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought it would be becoming to die drunk.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Give us more grog,” they cried, “for it will be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All one an hour hence.” Juan answered, “No!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true that Death awaits both you and me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let us die like men, not sink below</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like brutes:”⁠—and thus his dangerous post kept he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And none liked to anticipate the blow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even Pedrillo, his most reverend tutor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was for some rum a disappointed suitor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The good old gentleman was quite aghast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made a loud and pious lamentation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Repented all his sins, and made a last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Irrevocable vow of reformation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing should tempt him more (this peril past)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To quit his academic occupation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In cloisters of the classic Salamanca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To follow Juan’s wake, like Sancho Panca.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now there came a flash of hope once more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Day broke, and the wind lulled: the masts were gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The leak increased; shoals round her, but no shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vessel swam, yet still she held her own.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They tried the pumps again, and though before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their desperate efforts seemed all useless grown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A glimpse of sunshine set some hands to bale⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stronger pumped, the weaker thrummed a sail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Under the vessel’s keel the sail was passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for the moment it had some effect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with a leak, and not a stick of mast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor rag of canvas, what could they expect?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still ’tis best to struggle to the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis never too late to be wholly wrecked:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though ’tis true that man can only die once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not so pleasant in the Gulf of Lyons.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There winds and waves had hurled them, and from thence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without their will, they carried them away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they were forced with steering to dispense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never had as yet a quiet day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which they might repose, or even commence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A jurymast or rudder, or could say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ship would swim an hour, which, by good luck,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still swam⁠—though not exactly like a duck.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The wind, in fact, perhaps, was rather less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the ship laboured so, they scarce could hope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weather out much longer; the distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was also great with which they had to cope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For want of water, and their solid mess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was scant enough: in vain the telescope</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was used⁠—nor sail nor shore appeared in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought but the heavy sea, and coming night.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Again the weather threatened⁠—again blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gale, and in the fore and after hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Water appeared; yet, though the people knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All this, the most were patient, and some bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until the chains and leathers were worn through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all our pumps:⁠—a wreck complete she rolled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At mercy of the waves, whose mercies are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like human beings during civil war.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then came the carpenter, at last, with tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his rough eyes, and told the captain, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could do no more: he was a man in years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long had voyaged through many a stormy sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if he wept at length they were not fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That made his eyelids as a woman’s be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he, poor fellow, had a wife and children⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two things for dying people quite bewildering.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The ship was evidently settling now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast by the head; and, all distinction gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some went to prayers again, and made a vow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of candles to their saints<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a>⁠—but there were none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pay them with; and some looked o’er the bow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some hoisted out the boats; and there was one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That begged Pedrillo for an absolution,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who told him to be damned⁠—in his confusion.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some lashed them in their hammocks; some put on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their best clothes, as if going to a fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some cursed the day on which they saw the Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gnashed their teeth, and, howling, tore their hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others went on as they had begun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Getting the boats out, being well aware</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a tight boat will live in a rough sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless with breakers close beneath her lee.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The worst of all was, that in their condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having been several days in great distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas difficult to get out such provision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As now might render their long suffering less:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men, even when dying, dislike inanition;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their stock was damaged by the weather’s stress:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two casks of biscuit, and a keg of butter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were all that could be thrown into the cutter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But in the long-boat they contrived to stow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some pounds of bread, though injured by the wet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Water, a twenty-gallon cask or so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Six flasks of wine; and they contrived to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A portion of their beef up from below,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with a piece of pork, moreover, met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But scarce enough to serve them for a luncheon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there was rum, eight gallons in a puncheon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The other boats, the yawl and pinnace, had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Been stove in the beginning of the gale;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the long-boat’s condition was but bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As there were but two blankets for a sail,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one oar for a mast, which a young lad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Threw in by good luck over the ship’s rail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And two boats could not hold, far less be stored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save one half the people then on board.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas twilight, and the sunless day went down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the waste of waters; like a veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, if withdrawn, would but disclose the frown<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one whose hate is masked but to assail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus to their hopeless eyes the night was shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And grimly darkled o’er the faces pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the dim desolate deep: twelve days had Fear<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Been their familiar, and now Death was here.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some trial had been making at a raft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With little hope in such a rolling sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sort of thing at which one would have laughed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any laughter at such times could be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless with people who too much have quaffed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have a kind of wild and horrid glee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half epileptical, and half hysterical:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their preservation would have been a miracle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At half-past eight o’clock, booms, hencoops, spars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all things, for a chance, had been cast loose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still could keep afloat the struggling tars,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For yet they strove, although of no great use:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no light in heaven but a few stars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The boats put off o’ercrowded with their crews;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She gave a heel, and then a lurch to port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, going down head foremost⁠—sunk, in short.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then rose from sea to sky the wild farewell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then shrieked the timid, and stood still the brave⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then some leaped overboard with dreadful yell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As eager to anticipate their grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sea yawned around her like a hell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And down she sucked with her the whirling wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like one who grapples with his enemy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And strives to strangle him before he die.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And first one universal shriek there rushed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Louder than the loud Ocean, like a crash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of echoing thunder; and then all was hushed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save the wild wind and the remorseless dash</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of billows; but at intervals there gushed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Accompanied by a convulsive splash,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A solitary shriek, the bubbling cry</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of some strong swimmer in his agony.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The boats, as stated, had got off before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in them crowded several of the crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet their present hope was hardly more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than what it had been, for so strong it blew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was slight chance of reaching any shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then they were too many, though so few⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine in the cutter, thirty in the boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were counted in them when they got afloat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All the rest perished; near two hundred souls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had left their bodies; and what’s worse, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When over Catholics the Ocean rolls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They must wait several weeks before a mass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takes off one peck of purgatorial coals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because, till people know what’s come to pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They won’t lay out their money on the dead⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It costs three francs for every mass that’s said.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan got into the long-boat, and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contrived to help Pedrillo to a place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed as if they had exchanged their care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Juan wore the magisterial face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which courage gives, while poor Pedrillo’s pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of eyes were crying for their owner’s case:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Battista, though, (a name called shortly Tita),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was lost by getting at some aqua-vita.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Pedro, his valet, too, he tried to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the same cause, conducive to his loss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left him so drunk, he jumped into the wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As o’er the cutter’s edge he tried to cross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so he found a wine-and-watery grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They could not rescue him although so close,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the sea ran higher every minute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for the boat⁠—the crew kept crowding in it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A small old spaniel⁠—which had been Don José’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His father’s, whom he loved, as ye may think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For on such things the memory reposes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With tenderness⁠—stood howling on the brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knowing, (dogs have such intellectual noses!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No doubt, the vessel was about to sink;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Juan caught him up, and ere he stepped</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Off threw him in, then after him he leaped.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He also stuffed his money where he could</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About his person, and Pedrillo’s too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who let him do, in fact, whate’er he would,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not knowing what himself to say, or do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As every rising wave his dread renewed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Juan, trusting they might still get through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deeming there were remedies for any ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus re-embarked his tutor and his spaniel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas a rough night, and blew so stiffly yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the sail was becalmed between the seas,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though on the wave’s high top too much to set,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They dared not take it in for all the breeze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each sea curled o’er the stern, and kept them wet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made them bale without a moment’s ease,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that themselves as well as hopes were damped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the poor little cutter quickly swamped.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nine souls more went in her: the long-boat still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kept above water, with an oar for mast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two blankets stitched together, answering ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of sail, were to the oar made fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though every wave rolled menacing to fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And present peril all before surpassed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They grieved for those who perished with the cutter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also for the biscuit-casks and butter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sun rose red and fiery, a sure sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the continuance of the gale: to run</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the sea until it should grow fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all that for the present could be done:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A few tea-spoonfuls of their rum and wine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were served out to the people, who begun<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To faint, and damaged bread wet through the bags,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And most of them had little clothes but rags.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They counted thirty, crowded in a space</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which left scarce room for motion or exertion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They did their best to modify their case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One half sate up, though numbed with the immersion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While t’ other half were laid down in their place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At watch and watch; thus, shivering like the tertian</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ague in its cold fit, they filled their boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With nothing but the sky for a great coat.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis very certain the desire of life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prolongs it: this is obvious to physicians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When patients, neither plagued with friends nor wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Survive through very desperate conditions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because they still can hope, nor shines the knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor shears of Atropos before their visions:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despair of all recovery spoils longevity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And makes men’s misery of alarming brevity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis said that persons living on annuities</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are longer lived than others⁠—God knows why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless to plague the grantors⁠—yet so true it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That some, I really think, <em>do</em> never die:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any creditors the worst a Jew it is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And <em>that</em>’s their mode of furnishing supply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my young days they lent me cash that way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I found very troublesome to pay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis thus with people in an open boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They live upon the love of Life, and bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than can be believed, or even thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stand like rocks the tempest’s wear and tear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hardship still has been the sailor’s lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since Noah’s ark went cruising here and there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had a curious crew as well as cargo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like the first old Greek privateer, the Argo.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But man is a carnivorous production,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And must have meals, at least one meal a day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He cannot live, like woodcocks, upon suction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, like the shark and tiger, must have prey;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although his anatomical construction</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bears vegetables, in a grumbling way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your labouring people think, beyond all question,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beef, veal, and mutton, better for digestion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus it was with this our hapless crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For on the third day there came on a calm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though at first their strength it might renew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lying on their weariness like balm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lulled them like turtles sleeping on the blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Ocean, when they woke they felt a qualm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell all ravenously on their provision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of hoarding it with due precision.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The consequence was easily foreseen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They ate up all they had, and drank their wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In spite of all remonstrances, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On what, in fact, next day were they to dine?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They hoped the wind would rise, these foolish men!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And carry them to shore; these hopes were fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as they had but one oar, and that brittle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would have been more wise to save their victual.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The fourth day came, but not a breath of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Ocean slumbered like an unweaned child:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fifth day, and their boat lay floating there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea and sky were blue, and clear, and mild⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their one oar (I wish they had had a pair)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What could they do? and Hunger’s rage grew wild:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Juan’s spaniel, spite of his entreating,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was killed, and portioned out for present eating.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On the sixth day they fed upon his hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan, who had still refused, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The creature was his father’s dog that died,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now feeling all the vulture in his jaws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With some remorse received (though first denied)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As a great favour one of the fore-paws,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-192" id="noteref-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he divided with Pedrillo, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Devoured it, longing for the other too.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The seventh day, and no wind⁠—the burning sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blistered and scorched, and, stagnant on the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They lay like carcasses; and hope was none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save in the breeze that came not: savagely</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They glared upon each other⁠—all was done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Water, and wine, and food⁠—and you might see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The longings of the cannibal arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Although they spoke not) in their wolfish eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At length one whispered his companion, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whispered another, and thus it went round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then into a hoarser murmur grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An ominous, and wild, and desperate sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when his comrade’s thought each sufferer knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas but his own, suppressed till now, he found:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And out they spoke of lots for flesh and blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And who should die to be his fellow’s food.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ere they came to this, they that day shared</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some leathern caps, and what remained of shoes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then they looked around them, and despaired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And none to be the sacrifice would choose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length the lots were torn up,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-193" id="noteref-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a> and prepared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of materials that must shock the Muse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Having no paper, for the want of better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They took by force from Juan Julia’s letter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The lots were made, and marked, and mixed, and handed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In silent horror,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-194" id="noteref-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a> and their distribution</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lulled even the savage hunger which demanded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like the Promethean vulture, this pollution;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None in particular had sought or planned it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas Nature gnawed them to this resolution,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which none were permitted to be neuter⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the lot fell on Juan’s luckless tutor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He but requested to be bled to death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The surgeon had his instruments, and bled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pedrillo, and so gently ebbed his breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You hardly could perceive when he was dead.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He died as born, a Catholic in faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like most in the belief in which they’re bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first a little crucifix he kissed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then held out his jugular and wrist.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The surgeon, as there was no other fee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had his first choice of morsels for his pains;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being thirstiest at the moment, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Preferred a draught from the fast-flowing veins:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part was divided, part thrown in the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such things as the entrails and the brains</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regaled two sharks, who followed o’er the billow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sailors ate the rest of poor Pedrillo.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sailors ate him, all save three or four,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were not quite so fond of animal food;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these was added Juan, who, before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Refusing his own spaniel, hardly could</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel now his appetite increased much more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas not to be expected that he should,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even in extremity of their disaster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dine with them on his pastor and his master.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas better that he did not; for, in fact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The consequence was awful in the extreme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For they, who were most ravenous in the act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Went raging mad<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a>⁠—Lord! how they did blaspheme!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And foam, and roll, with strange convulsions racked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drinking salt-water like a mountain-stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tearing, and grinning, howling, screeching, swearing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, with hyaena-laughter, died despairing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their numbers were much thinned by this infliction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all the rest were thin enough, Heaven knows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some of them had lost their recollection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Happier than they who still perceived their woes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But others pondered on a new dissection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if not warned sufficiently by those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had already perished, suffering madly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For having used their appetites so sadly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And next they thought upon the master’s mate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fattest; but he saved himself, because,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides being much averse from such a fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There were some other reasons: the first was,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had been rather indisposed of late;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And⁠—that which chiefly proved his saving clause⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was a small present made to him at Cadiz,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By general subscription of the ladies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of poor Pedrillo something still remained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But was used sparingly⁠—some were afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And others still their appetites constrained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or but at times a little supper made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All except Juan, who throughout abstained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chewing a piece of bamboo, and some lead:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length they caught two Boobies, and a Noddy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then they left off eating the dead body.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And if Pedrillo’s fate should shocking be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remember Ugolino<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a> condescends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To eat the head of his arch-enemy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moment after he politely ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tale: if foes be food in Hell, at sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis surely fair to dine upon our friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Shipwreck’s short allowance grows too scanty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without being much more horrible than Dante.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And the same night there fell a shower of rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which their mouths gaped, like the cracks of earth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When dried to summer dust; till taught by pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men really know not what good water’s worth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you had been in Turkey or in Spain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or with a famished boat’s-crew had your berth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or in the desert heard the camel’s bell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’d wish yourself where Truth is⁠—in a well.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It poured down torrents, but they were no richer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until they found a ragged piece of sheet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which served them as a sort of spongy pitcher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when they deemed its moisture was complete,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wrung it out, and though a thirsty ditcher<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might not have thought the scanty draught so sweet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a full pot of porter, to their thinking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They ne’er till now had known the joys of drinking.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And their baked lips, with many a bloody crack,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sucked in the moisture, which like nectar streamed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their throats were ovens, their swoln tongues were black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the rich man’s in Hell, who vainly screamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To beg the beggar, who could not rain back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A drop of dew, when every drop had seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To taste of Heaven⁠—If this be true, indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some Christians have a comfortable creed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There were two fathers in this ghastly crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with them their two sons, of whom the one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was more robust and hardy to the view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he died early; and when he was gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His nearest messmate told his sire, who threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One glance at him, and said, “Heaven’s will be done!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can do nothing,” and he saw him thrown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the deep without a tear or groan.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The other father had a weaklier child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a soft cheek, and aspect delicate;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the boy bore up long, and with a mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And patient spirit held aloof his fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Little he said, and now and then he smiled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if to win a part from off the weight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw increasing on his father’s heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the deep deadly thought, that they must part.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And o’er him bent his sire, and never raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His eyes from off his face, but wiped the foam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his pale lips, and ever on him gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when the wished-for shower at length was come,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the boy’s eyes, which the dull film half glazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Brightened, and for a moment seemed to roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He squeezed from out a rag some drops of rain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into his dying child’s mouth⁠—but in vain.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The boy expired⁠—the father held the clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked upon it long, and when at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death left no doubt, and the dead burden lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stiff on his heart, and pulse and hope were past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He watched it wistfully, until away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas borne by the rude wave wherein ’twas cast;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then he himself sunk down all dumb and shivering,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gave no sign of life, save his limbs quivering.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now overhead a rainbow, bursting through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scattering clouds, shone, spanning the dark sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resting its bright base on the quivering blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all within its arch appeared to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Clearer than that without, and its wide hue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waxed broad and waving, like a banner free,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then changed like to a bow that’s bent, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forsook the dim eyes of these shipwrecked men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It changed, of course; a heavenly Chameleon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The airy child of vapour and the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought forth in purple, cradled in vermilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Baptized in molten gold, and swathed in dun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glittering like crescents o’er a Turk’s pavilion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And blending every colour into one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just like a black eye in a recent scuffle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For sometimes we must box without the muffle).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our shipwrecked seamen thought it a good omen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is as well to think so, now and then;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas an old custom of the Greek and Roman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And may become of great advantage when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Folks are discouraged; and most surely no men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had greater need to nerve themselves again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than these, and so this rainbow looked like Hope⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite a celestial Kaleidoscope.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>About this time a beautiful white bird,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Webfooted, not unlike a dove in size</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And plumage (probably it might have erred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon its course), passed oft before their eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tried to perch, although it saw and heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The men within the boat, and in this guise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It came and went, and fluttered round them till</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Night fell:⁠—this seemed a better omen still.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But in this case I also must remark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas well this bird of promise did not perch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the tackle of our shattered bark</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not so safe for roosting as a church;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And had it been the dove from Noah’s ark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Returning there from her successful search,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in their way that moment chanced to fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would have eat her, olive-branch and all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With twilight it again came on to blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not with violence; the stars shone out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The boat made way; yet now they were so low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They knew not where nor what they were about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fancied they saw land, and some said “No!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The frequent fog-banks gave them cause to doubt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some swore that they heard breakers, others guns,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all mistook about the latter once.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As morning broke, the light wind died away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he who had the watch sung out and swore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’twas not land that rose with the Sun’s ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He wished that land he never might see more;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the rest rubbed their eyes and saw a bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thought they saw, and shaped their course for shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For shore it was, and gradually grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Distinct, and high, and palpable to view.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then of these some part burst into tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And others, looking with a stupid stare,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not yet separate their hopes from fears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seemed as if they had no further care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While a few prayed⁠—(the first time for some years)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the bottom of the boat three were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asleep: they shook them by the hand and head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tried to awaken them, but found them dead.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The day before, fast sleeping on the water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They found a turtle of the hawk’s-bill kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by good fortune, gliding softly, caught her,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which yielded a day’s life, and to their mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proved even still a more nutritious matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it left encouragement behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They thought that in such perils, more than chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had sent them this for their deliverance.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The land appeared a high and rocky coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And higher grew the mountains as they drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set by a current, toward it: they were lost</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In various conjectures, for none knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To what part of the earth they had been tost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So changeable had been the winds that blew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some thought it was Mount Aetna, some the highlands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Candia, Cyprus, Rhodes, or other islands.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime the current, with a rising gale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still set them onwards to the welcome shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Charon’s bark of spectres, dull and pale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their living freight was now reduced to four,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And three dead, whom their strength could not avail</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heave into the deep with those before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though the two sharks still followed them, and dashed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spray into their faces as they splashed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Famine⁠—despair⁠—cold⁠—thirst and heat, had done</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their work on them by turns, and thinned them to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such things a mother had not known her son</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst the skeletons of that gaunt crew;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By night chilled, by day scorched, thus one by one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They perished, until withered to these few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But chiefly by a species of self-slaughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In washing down Pedrillo with salt water.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As they drew nigh the land, which now was seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unequal in its aspect here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They felt the freshness of its growing green,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That waved in forest-tops, and smoothed the air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fell upon their glazed eyes like a screen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From glistening waves, and skies so hot and bare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lovely seemed any object that should sweep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away the vast⁠—salt⁠—dread⁠—eternal Deep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The shore looked wild, without a trace of man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And girt by formidable waves; but they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were mad for land, and thus their course they ran,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though right ahead the roaring breakers lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A reef between them also now began</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show its boiling surf and bounding spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But finding no place for their landing better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They ran the boat for shore⁠—and overset her.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But in his native stream, the Guadalquivir,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan to lave his youthful limbs was wont;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having learnt to swim in that sweet river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had often turned the art to some account:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A better swimmer you could scarce see ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could, perhaps, have passed the Hellespont,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once (a feat on which ourselves we prided)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leander, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Ekenhead, and I did.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So here, though faint, emaciated, and stark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He buoyed his boyish limbs, and strove to ply</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the quick wave, and gain, ere it was dark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beach which lay before him, high and dry:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greatest danger here was from a shark,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That carried off his neighbour by the thigh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for the other two, they could not swim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So nobody arrived on shore but him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Nor yet had he arrived but for the oar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, providentially for him, was washed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as his feeble arms could strike no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the hard wave o’erwhelmed him as ’twas dashed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within his grasp; he clung to it, and sore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The waters beat while he thereto was lashed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last, with swimming, wading, scrambling, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rolled on the beach, half-senseless, from the sea:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There, breathless, with his digging nails he clung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast to the sand, lest the returning wave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whose reluctant roar his life he wrung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should suck him back to her insatiate grave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there he lay, full length, where he was flung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before the entrance of a cliff-worn cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With just enough of life to feel its pain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deem that it was saved, perhaps, in vain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With slow and staggering effort he arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But sunk again upon his bleeding knee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quivering hand; and then he looked for those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who long had been his mates upon the sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But none of them appeared to share his woes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save one, a corpse, from out the famished three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who died two days before, and now had found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An unknown barren beach for burial ground.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And as he gazed, his dizzy brain spun fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And down he sunk; and as he sunk, the sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Swam round and round, and all his senses passed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He fell upon his side, and his stretched hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drooped dripping on the oar (their jury-mast),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, like a withered lily, on the land</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His slender frame and pallid aspect lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fair a thing as e’er was formed of clay.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How long in his damp trance young Juan lay<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knew not, for the earth was gone for him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Time had nothing more of night nor day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For his congealing blood, and senses dim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how this heavy faintness passed away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He knew not, till each painful pulse and limb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tingling vein, seemed throbbing back to life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Death, though vanquished, still retired with strife.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-112">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His eyes he opened, shut, again unclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For all was doubt and dizziness; he thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He still was in the boat, and had but dozed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felt again with his despair o’erwrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wished it Death in which he had reposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then once more his feelings back were brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slowly by his swimming eyes was seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lovely female face of seventeen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-113">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas bending close o’er his, and the small mouth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seemed almost prying into his for breath;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chafing him, the soft warm hand of youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Recalled his answering spirits back from Death:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, bathing his chill temples, tried to soothe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each pulse to animation, till beneath</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its gentle touch and trembling care, a sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these kind efforts made a low reply.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-114">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then was the cordial poured, and mantle flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around his scarce-clad limbs; and the fair arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Raised higher the faint head which o’er it hung;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And her transparent cheek, all pure and warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillowed his death-like forehead; then she wrung</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His dewy curls, long drenched by every storm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watched with eagerness each throb that drew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sigh from his heaved bosom⁠—and hers, too.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-115">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And lifting him with care into the cave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gentle girl, and her attendant⁠—one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young, yet her elder, and of brow less grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more robust of figure⁠—then begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kindle fire, and as the new flames gave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light to the rocks that roofed them, which the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had never seen, the maid, or whatsoe’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was, appeared distinct, and tall, and fair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-116">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her brow was overhung with coins of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That sparkled o’er the auburn of her hair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her clustering hair, whose longer locks were rolled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In braids behind; and though her stature were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even of the highest for a female mould,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They nearly reached her heel; and in her air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a something which bespoke command,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As one who was a Lady in the land.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-117">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her hair, I said, was auburn; but her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were black as Death, their lashes the same hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of downcast length, in whose silk shadow lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deepest attraction; for when to the view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth from its raven fringe the full glance flies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ne’er with such force the swiftest arrow flew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis as the snake late coiled, who pours his length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hurls at once his venom and his strength.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-118">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her brow was white and low, her cheek’s pure dye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like twilight rosy still with the set sun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Short upper lip⁠—sweet lips! that make us sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ever to have seen such; for she was one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fit for the model of a statuary</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A race of mere impostors, when all’s done⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve seen much finer women, ripe and real,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than all the nonsense of their stone ideal).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-119">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’ll tell you why I say so, for ’tis just</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One should not rail without a decent cause:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was an Irish lady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a> to whose bust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I ne’er saw justice done, and yet she was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A frequent model; and if e’er she must</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yield to stern Time and Nature’s wrinkling laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They will destroy a face which mortal thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ne’er compassed, nor less mortal chisel wrought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-120">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And such was she, the lady of the cave:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dress was very different from the Spanish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Simpler, and yet of colours not so grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, as you know, the Spanish women banish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright hues when out of doors, and yet, while wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around them (what I hope will never vanish)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The basquiña and the mantilla, they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seem at the same time mystical and gay.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-121">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But with our damsel this was not the case:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dress was many-coloured, finely spun;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her locks curled negligently round her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But through them gold and gems profusely shone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her girdle sparkled, and the richest lace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flowed in her veil, and many a precious stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flashed on her little hand; but, what was shocking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her small snow feet had slippers, but no stocking.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-122">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The other female’s dress was not unlike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But of inferior materials: she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not so many ornaments to strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hair had silver only, bound to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her dowry; and her veil, in form alike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was coarser; and her air, though firm, less free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her hair was thicker, but less long; her eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As black, but quicker, and of smaller size.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-123">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And these two tended him, and cheered him both</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With food and raiment, and those soft attentions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which are⁠—as I must own⁠—of female growth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have ten thousand delicate inventions:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They made a most superior mess of broth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing which poesy but seldom mentions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the best dish that e’er was cooked since Homer’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Achilles ordered dinner for new comers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-124">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’ll tell you who they were, this female pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lest they should seem Princesses in disguise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, I hate all mystery, and that air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of clap-trap, which your recent poets prize;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, in short, the girls they really were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They shall appear before your curious eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mistress and maid; the first was only daughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an old man, who lived upon the water.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-125">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A fisherman he had been in his youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And still a sort of fisherman was he;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But other speculations were, in sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Added to his connection with the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps not so respectable, in truth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little smuggling, and some piracy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left him, at last, the sole of many masters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an ill-gotten million of piastres.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-126">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A fisher, therefore, was he⁠—though of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Peter the Apostle, and he fished</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wandering merchant-vessels, now and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sometimes caught as many as he wished;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cargoes he confiscated, and gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sought in the slave-market too, and dished</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many a morsel for that Turkish trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which, no doubt, a good deal may be made.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-127">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was a Greek, and on his isle had built</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(One of the wild and smaller Cyclades)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A very handsome house from out his guilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there he lived exceedingly at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven knows what cash he got, or blood he spilt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sad old fellow was he, if you please;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this I know, it was a spacious building,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of barbaric carving, paint, and gilding.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-128">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had an only daughter, called Haidée,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greatest heiress of the Eastern Isles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, so very beautiful was she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her dowry was as nothing to her smiles:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still in her teens, and like a lovely tree</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She grew to womanhood, and between whiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rejected several suitors, just to learn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to accept a better in his turn.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-129">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And walking out upon the beach, below</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cliff, towards sunset, on that day she found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Insensible⁠—not dead, but nearly so⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Don Juan, almost famished, and half drowned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being naked, she was shocked, you know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet deemed herself in common pity bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as in her lay, “to take him in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A stranger” dying⁠—with so white a skin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-130">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But taking him into her father’s house</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not exactly the best way to save,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But like conveying to the cat the mouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or people in a trance into their grave;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the good old man had so much “<i xml:lang="el">νους</i>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unlike the honest Arab thieves so brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would have hospitably cured the stranger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sold him instantly when out of danger.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-131">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore, with her maid, she thought it best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A virgin always on her maid relies)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To place him in the cave for present rest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when, at last, he opened his black eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their charity increased about their guest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their compassion grew to such a size,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It opened half the turnpike-gates to Heaven⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(<abbr>St.</abbr> Paul says, ’tis the toll which must be given).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-132">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They made a fire⁠—but such a fire as they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the moment could contrive with such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Materials as were cast up round the bay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some broken planks, and oars, that to the touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were nearly tinder, since, so long they lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mast was almost crumbled to a crutch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, by God’s grace, here wrecks were in such plenty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That there was fuel to have furnished twenty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-133">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had a bed of furs, and a pelisse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Haidée stripped her sables off to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His couch; and, that he might be more at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And warm, in case by chance he should awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They also gave a petticoat apiece,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She and her maid⁠—and promised by daybreak</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To pay him a fresh visit, with a dish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For breakfast, of eggs, coffee, bread, and fish.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-134">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus they left him to his lone repose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan slept like a top, or like the dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who sleep at last, perhaps (God only knows),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just for the present; and in his lulled head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not even a vision of his former woes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throbbed in accurséd dreams, which sometimes spread<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unwelcome visions of our former years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till the eye, cheated, opens thick with tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-135">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Young Juan slept all dreamless:⁠—but the maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who smoothed his pillow, as she left the den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked back upon him, and a moment stayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turned, believing that he called again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He slumbered; yet she thought, at least she said</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The heart will slip, even as the tongue and pen),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had pronounced her name⁠—but she forgot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That at this moment Juan knew it not.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-136">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And pensive to her father’s house she went,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enjoining silence strict to Zoe, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Better than her knew what, in fact, she meant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She being wiser by a year or two:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A year or two’s an age when rightly spent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Zoe spent hers, as most women do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gaining all that useful sort of knowledge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is acquired in Nature’s good old college.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-137">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The morn broke, and found Juan slumbering still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fast in his cave, and nothing clashed upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His rest; the rushing of the neighbouring rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the young beams of the excluded Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troubled him not, and he might sleep his fill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And need he had of slumber yet, for none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had suffered more⁠—his hardships were comparative<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those related in my grand-dad’s “Narrative.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-138">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not so Haidée: she sadly tossed and tumbled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And started from her sleep, and, turning o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreamed of a thousand wrecks, o’er which she stumbled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And handsome corpses strewed upon the shore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And woke her maid so early that she grumbled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And called her father’s old slaves up, who swore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In several oaths⁠—Armenian, Turk, and Greek⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They knew not what to think of such a freak.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-139">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But up she got, and up she made them get,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With some pretence about the Sun, that makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweet skies just when he rises, or is set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ’tis, no doubt, a sight to see when breaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright Phoebus, while the mountains still are wet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With mist, and every bird with him awakes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And night is flung off like a mourning suit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worn for a husband⁠—or some other brute.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-140">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I say, the Sun is a most glorious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ve seen him rise full oft, indeed of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have sat up on purpose all the night,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hastens, as physicians say, one’s fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so all ye, who would be in the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In health and purse, begin your day to date</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From daybreak, and when coffined at fourscore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Engrave upon the plate, you rose at four.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-141">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Haidée met the morning face to face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her own was freshest, though a feverish flush</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had dyed it with the headlong blood, whose race</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From heart to cheek is curbed into a blush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like to a torrent which a mountain’s base,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That overpowers some Alpine river’s rush,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Checks to a lake, whose waves in circles spread;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or the Red Sea⁠—but the sea is not red.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-142">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And down the cliff the island virgin came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And near the cave her quick light footsteps drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the Sun smiled on her with his first flame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And young Aurora kissed her lips with dew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Taking her for a sister; just the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mistake you would have made on seeing the two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the mortal, quite as fresh and fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had all the advantage, too, of not being air.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-143">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when into the cavern Haidée stepped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All timidly, yet rapidly, she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like an infant Juan sweetly slept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then she stopped, and stood as if in awe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For sleep is awful), and on tiptoe crept</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wrapped him closer, lest the air, too raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should reach his blood, then o’er him still as Death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bent, with hushed lips, that drank his scarce-drawn breath.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-144">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus like to an Angel o’er the dying</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who die in righteousness, she leaned; and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All tranquilly the shipwrecked boy was lying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As o’er him lay the calm and stirless air:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Zoe the meantime some eggs was frying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since, after all, no doubt the youthful pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must breakfast⁠—and, betimes, lest they should ask it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She drew out her provision from the basket.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-145">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She knew that the best feelings must have victual,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that a shipwrecked youth would hungry be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, being less in love, she yawned a little,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And felt her veins chilled by the neighbouring sea;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so, she cooked their breakfast to a tittle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I can’t say that she gave them any tea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there were eggs, fruit, coffee, bread, fish, honey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Scio wine⁠—and all for love, not money.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-146">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Zoe, when the eggs were ready, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The coffee made, would fain have wakened Juan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Haidée stopped her with her quick small hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And without word, a sign her finger drew on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her lip, which Zoe needs must understand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, the first breakfast spoilt, prepared a new one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because her mistress would not let her break</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sleep which seemed as it would ne’er awake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-147">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For still he lay, and on his thin worn cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A purple hectic played like dying day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the snow-tops of distant hills; the streak</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sufferance yet upon his forehead lay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where the blue veins looked shadowy, shrunk, and weak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his black curls were dewy with the spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which weighed upon them yet, all damp and salt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mixed with the stony vapours of the vault.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-148">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And she bent o’er him, and he lay beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hushed as the babe upon its mother’s breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drooped as the willow when no winds can breathe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lulled like the depth of Ocean when at rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair as the crowning rose of the whole wreath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Soft as the callow cygnet in its nest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, he was a very pretty fellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although his woes had turned him rather yellow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-149">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He woke and gazed, and would have slept again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the fair face which met his eyes forbade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those eyes to close, though weariness and pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had further sleep a further pleasure made:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Woman’s face was never formed in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Juan, so that even when he prayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He turned from grisly saints, and martyrs hairy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the sweet portraits of the Virgin Mary.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-150">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus upon his elbow he arose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked upon the lady, in whose cheek</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pale contended with the purple rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As with an effort she began to speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes were eloquent, her words would pose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although she told him, in good modern Greek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With an Ionian accent, low and sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was faint, and must not talk, but eat.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-151">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now Juan could not understand a word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being no Grecian; but he had an ear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her voice was the warble of a bird,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So soft, so sweet, so delicately clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That finer, simpler music ne’er was heard;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sort of sound we echo with a tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without knowing why⁠—an overpowering tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whence Melody descends as from a throne.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-152">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Juan gazed as one who is awoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a distant organ, doubting if he be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not yet a dreamer, till the spell is broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the watchman, or some such reality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or by one’s early valet’s curséd knock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least it is a heavy sound to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who like a morning slumber⁠—for the night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shows stars and women in a better light.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-153">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Juan, too, was helped out from his dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sleep, or whatsoe’er it was, by feeling</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A most prodigious appetite; the steam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Zoe’s cookery no doubt was stealing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his senses, and the kindling beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the new fire, which Zoe kept up, kneeling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stir her viands, made him quite awake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And long for food, but chiefly a beef-steak.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-154">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But beef is rare within these oxless isles;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Goat’s flesh there is, no doubt, and kid, and mutton,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, when a holiday upon them smiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A joint upon their barbarous spits they put on:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this occurs but seldom, between whiles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For some of these are rocks with scarce a hut on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others are fair and fertile, among which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This, though not large, was one of the most rich.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-155">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I say that beef is rare, and can’t help thinking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the old fable of the Minotaur⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which our modern morals, rightly shrinking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Condemn the royal lady’s taste who wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cow’s shape for a mask⁠—was only (sinking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The allegory) a mere type, no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Pasiphae promoted breeding cattle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the Cretans bloodier in battle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-156">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For we all know that English people are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fed upon beef⁠—I won’t say much of beer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because ’tis liquor only, and being far</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From this my subject, has no business here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We know, too, they are very fond of war,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pleasure⁠—like all pleasures⁠—rather dear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So were the Cretans⁠—from which I infer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That beef and battles both were owing to her.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-157">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to resume. The languid Juan raised</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His head upon his elbow, and he saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sight on which he had not lately gazed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As all his latter meals had been quite raw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Three or four things, for which the Lord he praised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, feeling still the famished vulture gnaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He fell upon whate’er was offered, like</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A priest, a shark, an alderman, or pike.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-158">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He ate, and he was well supplied; and she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who watched him like a mother, would have fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him past all bounds, because she smiled to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such appetite in one she had deemed dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Zoe, being older than Haidée,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knew (by tradition, for she ne’er had read)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That famished people must be slowly nurst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fed by spoonfuls, else they always burst.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-159">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And so she took the liberty to state,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather by deeds than words, because the case</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was urgent, that the gentleman, whose fate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had made her mistress quit her bed to trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sea-shore at this hour, must leave his plate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless he wished to die upon the place⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She snatched it, and refused another morsel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saying, he had gorged enough to make a horse ill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-160">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Next they⁠—he being naked, save a tattered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pair of scarce decent trousers⁠—went to work,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the fire his recent rags they scattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dressed him, for the present, like a Turk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Greek⁠—that is, although it not much mattered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Omitting turban, slippers, pistol, dirk⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They furnished him, entire, except some stitches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a clean shirt, and very spacious breeches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-161">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then fair Haidée tried her tongue at speaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not a word could Juan comprehend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although he listened so that the young Greek in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her earnestness would ne’er have made an end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as he interrupted not, went eking</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her speech out to her protégé and friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till pausing at the last her breath to take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She saw he did not understand Romaic.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-162">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then she had recourse to nods, and signs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smiles, and sparkles of the speaking eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And read (the only book she could) the lines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his fair face, and found, by sympathy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The answer eloquent, where the Soul shines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And darts in one quick glance a long reply;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus in every look she saw expressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A world of words, and things at which she guessed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-163">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now, by dint of fingers and of eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And words repeated after her, he took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lesson in her tongue; but by surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No doubt, less of her language than her look:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As he who studies fervently the skies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turns oftener to the stars than to his book,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Juan learned his <em>alpha beta</em> better</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Haidée’s glance than any graven letter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-164">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis pleasing to be schooled in a strange tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By female lips and eyes⁠—that is, I mean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When both the teacher and the taught are young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As was the case, at least, where I have been;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They smile so when one’s right, and when one’s wrong</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They smile still more, and then there intervene</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pressure of hands, perhaps even a chaste kiss;⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I learned the little that I know by this:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-165">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That is, some words of Spanish, Turk, and Greek,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Italian not at all, having no teachers;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much English I cannot pretend to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Learning that language chiefly from its preachers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Barrow, South, Tillotson, whom every week</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I study, also Blair⁠—the highest reachers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of eloquence in piety and prose⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate your poets, so read none of those.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-166">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As for the ladies, I have nought to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wanderer from the British world of Fashion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I, like other “dogs, have had my day,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like other men, too, may have had my passion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that, like other things, has passed away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her fools whom I <em>could</em> lay the lash on:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foes, friends, men, women, now are nought to me</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But dreams of what has been, no more to be.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-167">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Return we to Don Juan. He begun<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear new words, and to repeat them; but</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some feelings, universal as the Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were such as could not in his breast be shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than within the bosom of a nun:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was in love⁠—as you would be, no doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a young benefactress⁠—so was she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just in the way we very often see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-168">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And every day by daybreak⁠—rather early</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Juan, who was somewhat fond of rest⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She came into the cave, but it was merely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see her bird reposing in his nest;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And she would softly stir his locks so curly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without disturbing her yet slumbering guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Breathing all gently o’er his cheek and mouth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As o’er a bed of roses the sweet South.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-169">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And every morn his colour freshlier came,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every day helped on his convalescence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas well, because health in the human frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is pleasant, besides being true Love’s essence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For health and idleness to Passion’s flame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are oil and gunpowder; and some good lessons</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are also learnt from Ceres and from Bacchus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without whom Venus will not long attack us.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-170">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While Venus fills the heart, (without heart really</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love, though good always, is not quite so good,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ceres presents a plate of vermicelli⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Love must be sustained like flesh and blood⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Bacchus pours out wine, or hands a jelly:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eggs, oysters, too, are amatory food;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But who is their purveyor from above</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven knows⁠—it may be Neptune, Pan, or Jove.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-171">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Juan woke he found some good things ready,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bath, a breakfast, and the finest eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That ever made a youthful heart less steady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides her maid’s, as pretty for their size;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I have spoken of all this already⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A repetition’s tiresome and unwise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well⁠—Juan, after bathing in the sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came always back to coffee and Haidée.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-172">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Both were so young, and one so innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That bathing passed for nothing; Juan seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To her, as ’twere, the kind of being sent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom these two years she had nightly dreamed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A something to be loved, a creature meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be her happiness, and whom she deemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To render happy; all who joy would win</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must share it⁠—Happiness was born a Twin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-173">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was such pleasure to behold him, such</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enlargement of existence to partake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nature with him, to thrill beneath his touch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To watch him slumbering, and to see him wake:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To live with him for ever were too much;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then the thought of parting made her quake;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was her own, her ocean-treasure, cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a rich wreck⁠—her first love, and her last.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-174">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus a moon rolled on, and fair Haidée</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Paid daily visits to her boy, and took</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such plentiful precautions, that still he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remained unknown within his craggy nook;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At last her father’s prows put out to sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For certain merchantmen upon the look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not as of yore to carry off an Io,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But three Ragusan vessels, bound for Scio.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-175">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then came her freedom, for she had no mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that, her father being at sea, she was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Free as a married woman, or such other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Female, as where she likes may freely pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without even the encumbrance of a brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The freest she that ever gazed on glass:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I speak of Christian lands in this comparison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where wives, at least, are seldom kept in garrison.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-176">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now she prolonged her visits and her talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For they must talk), and he had learnt to say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much as to propose to take a walk⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For little had he wandered since the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which, like a young flower snapped from the stalk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drooping and dewy on the beach he lay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus they walked out in the afternoon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saw the sun set opposite the moon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-177">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was a wild and breaker-beaten coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cliffs above, and a broad sandy shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Guarded by shoals and rocks as by an host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With here and there a creek, whose aspect wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A better welcome to the tempest-tost;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rarely ceased the haughty billow’s roar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save on the dead long summer days, which make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The outstretched Ocean glitter like a lake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-178">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And the small ripple spilt upon the beach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scarcely o’erpassed the cream of your champagne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When o’er the brim the sparkling bumpers reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That spring-dew of the spirit! the heart’s rain!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few things surpass old wine; and they may preach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who please⁠—the more because they preach in vain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let us have Wine and Woman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a> Mirth and Laughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sermons and soda-water the day after.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-179">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Man, being reasonable, must get drunk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The best of Life is but intoxication:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glory, the Grape, Love, Gold, in these are sunk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hopes of all men, and of every nation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without their sap, how branchless were the trunk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Life’s strange tree, so fruitful on occasion!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to return⁠—Get very drunk, and when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You wake with headache⁠—you shall see what then!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-180">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ring for your valet⁠—bid him quickly bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some hock and soda-water,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a> then you’ll know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pleasure worthy Xerxes the great king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For not the blest sherbet, sublimed with snow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor the first sparkle of the desert-spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor Burgundy in all its sunset glow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>After long travel, Ennui, Love, or Slaughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Vie with that draught of hock and soda-water!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-181">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The coast⁠—I think it was the coast that I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was just describing⁠—Yes, it <em>was</em> the coast⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lay at this period quiet as the sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sands untumbled, the blue waves untossed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all was stillness, save the sea-bird’s cry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dolphin’s leap, and little billow crossed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By some low rock or shelve, that made it fret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the boundary it scarcely wet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-182">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And forth they wandered, her sire being gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I have said, upon an expedition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mother, brother, guardian, she had none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save Zoe, who, although with due precision</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She waited on her lady with the Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought daily service was her only mission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bringing warm water, wreathing her long tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And asking now and then for cast-off dresses.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-183">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was the cooling hour, just when the rounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Red sun sinks down behind the azure hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which then seems as if the whole earth it bounded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Circling all Nature, hushed, and dim, and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the far mountain-crescent half surrounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On one side, and the deep sea calm and chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the other, and the rosy sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one star sparkling through it like an eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-184">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus they wandered forth, and hand in hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the shining pebbles and the shells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glided along the smooth and hardened sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in the worn and wild receptacles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Worked by the storms, yet worked as it were planned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In hollow halls, with sparry roofs and cells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They turned to rest; and, each clasped by an arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yielded to the deep Twilight’s purple charm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-185">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They looked up to the sky, whose floating glow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spread like a rosy Ocean, vast and bright;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>They gazed upon the glittering sea below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whence the broad Moon rose circling into sight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They heard the waves’ splash, and the wind so low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And saw each other’s dark eyes darting light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into each other⁠—and, beholding this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lips drew near, and clung into a kiss;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-186">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A long, long kiss, a kiss of Youth, and Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Beauty, all concentrating like rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into one focus, kindled from above;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such kisses as belong to early days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Heart, and Soul, and Sense, in concert move,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the blood’s lava, and the pulse a blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each kiss a heart-quake⁠—for a kiss’s strength,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think, it must be reckoned by its length.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-187">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By length I mean duration; theirs endured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaven knows how long⁠—no doubt they never reckoned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if they had, they could not have secured</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sum of their sensations to a second:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They had not spoken, but they felt allured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if their souls and lips each other beckoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, being joined, like swarming bees they clung⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hearts the flowers from whence the honey sprung.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-188">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They were alone, but not alone as they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who shut in chambers think it loneliness;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The silent Ocean, and the starlight bay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The twilight glow, which momently grew less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voiceless sands, and dropping caves, that lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Around them, made them to each other press,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if there were no life beneath the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save theirs, and that their life could never die.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-189">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They feared no eyes nor ears on that lone beach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They felt no terrors from the night; they were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All in all to each other: though their speech</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was broken words, they <em>thought</em> a language there⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the burning tongues the Passions teach<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found in one sigh the best interpreter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Nature’s oracle⁠—first love⁠—that all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Eve has left her daughters since her fall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-190">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Haidée spoke not of scruples, asked no vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor offered any; she had never heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of plight and promises to be a spouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or perils by a loving maid incurred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was all which pure Ignorance allows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flew to her young mate like a young bird;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, never having dreamt of falsehood, she</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not one word to say of constancy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-191">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She loved, and was belovéd⁠—she adored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she was worshipped after Nature’s fashion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their intense souls, into each other poured,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If souls could die, had perished in that passion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by degrees their senses were restored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Again to be o’ercome, again to dash on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, beating ’gainst <em>his</em> bosom, Haidée’s heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt as if never more to beat apart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-192">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! they were so young, so beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So lonely, loving, helpless, and the hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was that in which the Heart is always full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, having o’er itself no further power,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prompts deeds Eternity can not annul,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But pays off moments in an endless shower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hell-fire⁠—all prepared for people giving</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure or pain to one another living.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-193">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! for Juan and Haidée! they were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So loving and so lovely⁠—till then never,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excepting our first parents, such a pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had run the risk of being damned for ever:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Haidée, being devout as well as fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had, doubtless, heard about the Stygian river,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hell and Purgatory⁠—but forgot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just in the very crisis she should not.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-194">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They look upon each other, and their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gleam in the moonlight; and her white arm clasps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Round Juan’s head, and his around her lies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half buried in the tresses which it grasps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sits upon his knee, and drinks his sighs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He hers, until they end in broken gasps;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus they form a group that’s quite antique,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Half naked, loving, natural, and Greek.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-195">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when those deep and burning moments passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan sunk to sleep within her arms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She slept not, but all tenderly, though fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sustained his head upon her bosom’s charms;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now and then her eye to Heaven is cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then on the pale cheek her breast now warms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pillowed on her o’erflowing heart, which pants</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all it granted, and with all it grants.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-196">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An infant when it gazes on a light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A child the moment when it drains the breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A devotee when soars the Host in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An Arab with a stranger for a guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sailor when the prize has struck in fight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A miser filling his most hoarded chest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel rapture; but not such true joy are reaping</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As they who watch o’er what they love while sleeping.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-197">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For there it lies so tranquil, so beloved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that it hath of Life with us is living;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So gentle, stirless, helpless, and unmoved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all unconscious of the joy ’tis giving;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All it hath felt, inflicted, passed, and proved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hushed into depths beyond the watcher’s diving:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lies the thing we love with all its errors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all its charms, like Death without its terrors.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-198">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Lady watched her lover⁠—and that hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Love’s, and Night’s, and Ocean’s solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erflowed her soul with their united power;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst the barren sand and rocks so rude</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She and her wave-worn love had made their bower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where nought upon their passion could intrude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all the stars that crowded the blue space</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw nothing happier than her glowing face.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-199">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! the love of Women! it is known</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be a lovely and a fearful thing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all of theirs upon that die is thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if ’tis lost, Life hath no more to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them but mockeries of the past alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And their revenge is as the tiger’s spring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deadly, and quick, and crushing; yet, as real</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Torture is theirs⁠—what they inflict they feel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-200">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They are right; for Man, to man so oft unjust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is always so to Women: one sole bond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaits them⁠—treachery is all their trust;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Taught to conceal their bursting hearts despond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over their idol, till some wealthier lust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Buys them in marriage⁠—and what rests beyond?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thankless husband⁠—next, a faithless lover⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then dressing, nursing, praying⁠—and all’s over.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-201">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some take a lover, some take drams or prayers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some mind their household, others dissipation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some run away, and but exchange their cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Losing the advantage of a virtuous station;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few changes e’er can better their affairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Theirs being an unnatural situation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From the dull palace to the dirty hovel:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some play the devil, and then write a novel.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-202">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Haidée was Nature’s bride, and knew not this;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Haidée was Passion’s child, born where the Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Showers triple light, and scorches even the kiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his gazelle-eyed daughters; she was one</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made but to love, to feel that she was his</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who was her chosen: what was said or done</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elsewhere was nothing. She had nought to fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hope, care, nor love, beyond⁠—her heart beat <em>here</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-203">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And oh! that quickening of the heart, that beat!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How much it costs us! yet each rising throb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is in its cause as its effect so sweet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Wisdom, ever on the watch to rob</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Joy of its alchemy, and to repeat</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fine truths; even Conscience, too, has a tough job</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make us understand each good old maxim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So good⁠—I wonder Castlereagh don’t tax ’em.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-204">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now ’twas done⁠—on the lone shore were plighted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their hearts; the stars, their nuptial torches, shed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beauty upon the beautiful they lighted:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ocean their witness, and the cave their bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By their own feelings hallowed and united,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their priest was Solitude, and they were wed:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they were happy⁠—for to their young eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each was an angel, and earth Paradise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-205">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, Love! of whom great Caesar was the suitor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Titus the master,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a> Antony the slave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horace, Catullus, scholars⁠—Ovid tutor⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sappho the sage blue-stocking, in whose grave</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All those may leap who rather would be neuter⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Leucadia’s rock still overlooks the wave)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, Love! thou art the very God of evil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, after all, we cannot call thee Devil.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-206">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thou mak’st the chaste connubial state precarious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And jestest with the brows of mightiest men:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caesar and Pompey, Muhammad, Belisarius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have much employed the Muse of History’s pen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lives and fortunes were extremely various,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such worthies Time will never see again;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet to these four in three things the same luck holds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all were heroes, conquerors, and cuckolds.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-207">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thou mak’st philosophers; there’s Epicurus</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Aristippus, a material crew!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who to immoral courses would allure us</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By theories quite practicable too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If only from the Devil they would insure us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How pleasant were the maxim (not quite new),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Eat, drink, and love, what can the rest avail us?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So said the royal sage Sardanapalus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-208">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan! had he quite forgotten Julia?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And should he have forgotten her so soon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can’t but say it seems to me most truly a</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perplexing question; but, no doubt, the moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Does these things for us, and whenever newly a</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strong palpitation rises, ’tis her boon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else how the devil is it that fresh features</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have such a charm for us poor human creatures?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-209">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I hate inconstancy⁠—I loathe, detest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Abhor, condemn, abjure the mortal made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of such quicksilver clay that in his breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No permanent foundation can be laid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love, constant love, has been my constant guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet last night, being at a masquerade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I saw the prettiest creature, fresh from Milan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which gave me some sensations like a villain.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-210">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But soon Philosophy came to my aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whispered, “Think of every sacred tie!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I will, my dear Philosophy!” I said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“But then her teeth, and then, oh, Heaven! her eye!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll just inquire if she be wife or maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or neither⁠—out of curiosity.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Stop!” cried Philosophy, with air so Grecian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though she was masqued then as a fair Venetian;)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-211">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Stop!” so I stopped.⁠—But to return: that which</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men call inconstancy is nothing more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than admiration due where Nature’s rich</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Profusion with young beauty covers o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some favoured object; and as in the niche</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lovely statue we almost adore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This sort of adoration of the real</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is but a heightening of the beau ideal.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-212">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis the perception of the Beautiful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fine extension of the faculties,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Platonic, universal, wonderful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drawn from the stars, and filtered through the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without which Life would be extremely dull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In short, it is the use of our own eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one or two small senses added, just</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hint that flesh is formed of fiery dust.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-213">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet ’tis a painful feeling, and unwilling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For surely if we always could perceive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the same object graces quite as killing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As when she rose upon us like an Eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T would save us many a heartache, many a shilling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For we must get them anyhow, or grieve),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereas if one sole lady pleased for ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How pleasant for the heart, as well as liver!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-214">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Heart is like the sky, a part of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But changes night and day, too, like the sky;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now o’er it clouds and thunder must be driven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Darkness and Destruction as on high:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when it hath been scorched, and pierced, and riven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its storms expire in water-drops; the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pours forth at last the Heart’s blood turned to tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which make the English climate of our years.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-215">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The liver is the lazaret of bile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But very rarely executes its function,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first passion stays there such a while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That all the rest creep in and form a junction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like knots of vipers on a dunghill’s soil⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rage, fear, hate, jealousy, revenge, compunction⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that all mischiefs spring up from this entrail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Earthquakes from the hidden fire called “central.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-2-216">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CCXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the mean time, without proceeding more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this anatomy, I’ve finished now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two hundred and odd stanzas as before,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being about the number I’ll allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each canto of the twelve, or twenty-four;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, laying down my pen, I make my bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving Don Juan and Haidée to plead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For them and theirs with all who deign to read.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
