<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-14-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If from great Nature’s or our own abyss<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1062" id="noteref-1062" epub:type="noteref">1062</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Thought we could but snatch a certainty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps Mankind might find the path they miss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then ’t would spoil much good philosophy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One system eats another up, and this<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1063" id="noteref-1063" epub:type="noteref">1063</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much as old Saturn ate his progeny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For when his pious consort gave him stones</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lieu of sons, of these he made no bones.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But System doth reverse the Titan’s breakfast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eats her parents, albeit the digestion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is difficult. Pray tell me, can you make fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After due search, your faith to any question?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look back o’er ages, ere unto the stake fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You bind yourself, and call some mode the best one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing more true than <em>not</em> to trust your senses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet what are your other evidences?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For me, I know nought; nothing I deny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admit⁠—reject⁠—contemn: and what know <em>you</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except perhaps that you were born to die?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And both may after all turn out untrue.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An age may come, Font of Eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When nothing shall be either old or new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death, so called, is a thing which makes men weep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet a third of Life is passed in sleep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A sleep without dreams, after a rough day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of toil, is what we covet most; and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How clay shrinks back from more quiescent clay!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very Suicide that pays his debt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At once without instalments (an old way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of paying debts, which creditors regret),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lets out impatiently his rushing breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less from disgust of Life than dread of Death.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis round him⁠—near him⁠—here⁠—there⁠—everywhere⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there’s a courage which grows out of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps of all most desperate, which will dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The worst to <em>know</em> it:⁠—when the mountains rear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their peaks beneath your human foot, and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You look down o’er the precipice, and drear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gulf of rock yawns⁠—you can’t gaze a minute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without an awful wish to plunge within it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis true, you don’t⁠—but, pale and struck with terror,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Retire: but look into your past impression!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you will find, though shuddering at the mirror</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of your own thoughts, in all their self-confession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lurking bias,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1064" id="noteref-1064" epub:type="noteref">1064</a> be it truth or error,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the <em>unknown</em>; a secret prepossession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To plunge with all your fears⁠—but where? You know not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that’s the reason why you do⁠—or do not.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what’s this to the purpose? you will say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><abbr>Gent.</abbr> reader, nothing; a mere speculation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which my sole excuse is⁠—’tis my way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes <em>with</em> and sometimes without occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I write what’s uppermost, without delay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This narrative is not meant for narration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a mere airy and fantastic basis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To build up common things with common places.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>You know, or don’t know, that great Bacon saith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fling up a straw, ’t will show the way the wind blows;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1065" id="noteref-1065" epub:type="noteref">1065</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such a straw, borne on by human breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is Poesy, according as the Mind glows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A paper kite which flies ’twixt Life and Death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shadow which the onward Soul behind throws:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And mine’s a bubble, not blown up for praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But just to play with, as an infant plays.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The World is all before me<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1066" id="noteref-1066" epub:type="noteref">1066</a>⁠—or behind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I have seen a portion of that same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And quite enough for me to keep in mind;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of passions, too, I have proved enough to blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the great pleasure of our friends, Mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who like to mix some slight alloy with fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I was rather famous in my time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until I fairly knocked it up with rhyme.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have brought this world about my ears, and eke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other; that’s to say, the Clergy⁠—who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my head have bid their thunders break</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In pious libels by no means a few.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet I can’t help scribbling once a week,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tiring old readers, nor discovering new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Youth I wrote because my mind was full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And <em>now</em> because I feel it growing dull.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But “why then publish?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1067" id="noteref-1067" epub:type="noteref">1067</a>⁠—There are no rewards</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fame or profit when the World grows weary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask in turn⁠—Why do you play at cards?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Why drink? Why read?⁠—To make some hour less dreary.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It occupies me to turn back regards</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On what I’ve seen or pondered, sad or cheery;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what I write I cast upon the stream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To swim or sink⁠—I have had at least my dream.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I think that were I <em>certain</em> of success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I hardly could compose another line:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So long I’ve battled either more or less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no defeat can drive me from the Nine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This feeling ’tis not easy to express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet ’tis not affected, I opine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In play, there are two pleasures for your choosing⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The one is winning, and the other losing.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Besides, my Muse by no means deals in fiction:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She gathers a repertory of facts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of course with some reserve and slight restriction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mostly sings of human things and acts⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that’s one cause she meets with contradiction;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For too much truth, at first sight, ne’er attracts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were her object only what’s called Glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With more ease too she’d tell a different story.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Love⁠—War⁠—a tempest⁠—surely there’s variety;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Also a seasoning slight of lucubration;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bird’s-eye view, too, of that wild, Society;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A slight glance thrown on men of every station.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If you have nought else, here’s at least satiety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in performance and in preparation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though these lines should only line portmanteaus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trade will be all the better for these Cantos.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The portion of this World which I at present</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have taken up to fill the following sermon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is one of which there’s no description recent:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The reason why is easy to determine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although it seems both prominent and pleasant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is a sameness in its gems and ermine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dull and family likeness through all ages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of no great promise for poetic pages.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With much to excite, there’s little to exalt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nothing that speaks to all men and all times;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sort of varnish over every fault;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A kind of common-place, even in their crimes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Factitious passions⁠—Wit without much salt⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A want of that true nature which sublimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er it shows with Truth; a smooth monotony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of character, in those at least who have got any.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sometimes, indeed, like soldiers off parade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They break their ranks and gladly leave the drill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then the roll-call draws them back afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they must be or seem what they <em>were</em>: still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doubtless it is a brilliant masquerade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when of the first sight you have had your fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It palls⁠—at least it did so upon me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This paradise of Pleasure and <em>Ennui</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When we have made our love, and gamed our gaming,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dressed, voted, shone, and, may be, something more⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dandies dined⁠—heard senators declaiming⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seen beauties brought to market by the score,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad rakes to sadder husbands chastely taming⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There’s little left but to be bored or bore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Witness those <i xml:lang="fr">ci-devant jeunes hommes</i> who stem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stream, nor leave the world which leaveth them.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis said⁠—indeed a general complaint⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That no one has succeeded in describing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The <i xml:lang="fr">monde</i>, exactly as they ought to paint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some say, that authors only snatch, by bribing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The porter, some slight scandals strange and quaint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To furnish matter for their moral gibing;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that their books have but one style in common⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Lady’s prattle, filtered through her woman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But this can’t well be true, just now; for writers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are grown of the <i xml:lang="fr">beau monde</i> a part potential:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve seen them balance even the scale with fighters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially when young, for that’s essential.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why do their sketches fail them as inditers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what they deem themselves most consequential,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The <em>real</em> portrait of the highest tribe?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis that⁠—in fact⁠—there’s little to describe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Haud ignara loquor;</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1068" id="noteref-1068" epub:type="noteref">1068</a> these are <i xml:lang="la">Nugae</i>, “<i xml:lang="la">quarum</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="la">Pars <em>parva</em> fui</i>,” but still art and part.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now I could much more easily sketch a harem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A battle, wreck, or history of the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than these things; and besides, I wish to spare ’em,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For reasons which I choose to keep apart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Vetabo Cereris sacrum qui vulgarit</i>”⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1069" id="noteref-1069" epub:type="noteref">1069</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which means, that vulgar people must not share it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore what I throw off is ideal⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lowered, leavened, like a history of Freemasons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bears the same relation to the real,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Captain Parry’s Voyage may do to Jason’s.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grand <em>Arcanum</em>’s not for men to see all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My music has some mystic diapasons;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there is much which could not be appreciated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In any manner by the uninitiated.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! worlds fall⁠—and Woman, since she felled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The World (as, since that history, less polite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than true, hath been a creed so strictly held),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has not yet given up the practice quite.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Thing of Usages! coerced, compelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Victim when wrong, and martyr oft when right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Condemned to child-bed, as men for their sins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have shaving too entailed upon their chins⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A daily plague, which in the aggregate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May average on the whole with parturition.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But as to women⁠—who can penetrate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The real sufferings of their she condition?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Man’s very sympathy with their estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has much of selfishness, and more suspicion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their love, their virtue, beauty, education,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But form good housekeepers⁠—to breed a nation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All this were very well, and can’t be better;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But even this is difficult, Heaven knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many troubles from her birth beset her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such small distinction between friends and foes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gilding wears so soon from off her fetter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That⁠—but ask any woman if she’d choose</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Take her at thirty, that is) to have been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Female or male? a schoolboy or a Queen?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Petticoat Influence” is a great reproach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which even those who obey would fain be thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fly from, as from hungry pikes a roach;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since beneath it upon earth we are brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By various joltings of Life’s hackney coach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I for one venerate a petticoat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A garment of a mystical sublimity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No matter whether russet, silk, or dimity.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1070" id="noteref-1070" epub:type="noteref">1070</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Much I respect, and much I have adored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In my young days, that chaste and goodly veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which holds a treasure, like a miser’s hoard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And more attracts by all it doth conceal⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A golden scabbard on a Damasque sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A loving letter with a mystic seal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A cure for grief⁠—for what can ever rankle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before a petticoat and peeping ankle?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when upon a silent, sullen day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With a Sirocco, for example, blowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When even the sea looks dim with all its spray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sulkily the river’s ripple’s flowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the sky shows that very ancient gray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sober, sad antithesis to glowing⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis pleasant, if <em>then</em> anything is pleasant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To catch a glimpse even of a pretty peasant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We left our heroes and our heroines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In that fair clime which don’t depend on climate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite independent of the Zodiac’s signs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though certainly more difficult to rhyme at,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the Sun, and stars, and aught that shines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mountains, and all we can be most sublime at,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are there oft dull and dreary as a <em>dun</em>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether a sky’s or tradesman’s is all one.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An in-door life is less poetical;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And out-of-door hath showers, and mists, and sleet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which I could not brew a pastoral:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But be it as it may, a bard must meet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All difficulties, whether great or small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To spoil his undertaking, or complete⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And work away⁠—like Spirit upon Matter⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embarrassed somewhat both with fire and water.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan⁠—in this respect, at least, like saints⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was all things unto people of all sorts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lived contentedly, without complaints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In camps, in ships, in cottages, or courts⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born with that happy soul which seldom faints,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mingling modestly in toils or sports.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He likewise could be most things to all women,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the coxcombry of certain <em>she</em> men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A fox-hunt to a foreigner is strange;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis also subject to the double danger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of tumbling first, and having in exchange</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some pleasant jesting at the awkward stranger:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Juan had been early taught to range</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wilds, as doth an Arab turned avenger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that his horse, or charger, hunter, hack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knew that he had a rider on his back.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now in this new field, with some applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cleared hedge, ditch, and double post, and rail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And never <em>craned</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1071" id="noteref-1071" epub:type="noteref">1071</a> and made but few “faux pas,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only fretted when the scent ’gan fail.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He broke, ’tis true, some statutes of the laws</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hunting⁠—for the sagest youth is frail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rode o’er the hounds, it may be, now and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And once o’er several Country Gentlemen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But on the whole, to general admiration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He acquitted both himself and horse: the Squires</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marvelled at merit of another nation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The boors cried “Dang it! who’d have thought it?”⁠—Sires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Nestors of the sporting generation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Swore praises, and recalled their former fires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Huntsman’s self relented to a grin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rated him almost a whipper-in.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1072" id="noteref-1072" epub:type="noteref">1072</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such were his trophies⁠—not of spear and shield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But leaps, and bursts, and sometimes foxes’ brushes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I must own⁠—although in this I yield</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To patriot sympathy a Briton’s blushes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought at heart like courtly Chesterfield,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, after a long chase o’er hills, dales, bushes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what not, though he rode beyond all price.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asked next day, “If men ever hunted <em>twice</em>?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1073" id="noteref-1073" epub:type="noteref">1073</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1074" id="noteref-1074" epub:type="noteref">1074</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He also had a quality uncommon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To early risers after a long chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who wake in winter ere the cock can summon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">December’s drowsy day to his dull race⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quality agreeable to Woman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When her soft, liquid words run on apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who likes a listener, whether Saint or Sinner⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He did not fall asleep just after dinner;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, light and airy, stood on the alert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And shone in the best part of dialogue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By humouring always what they might assert,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And listening to the topics most in vogue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now grave, now gay, but never dull or pert;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smiling but in secret⁠—cunning rogue!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He ne’er presumed to make an error clearer;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, there never was a better hearer.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then he danced;⁠—all foreigners excel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The serious Angles in the eloquence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pantomime!⁠—he danced, I say, right well,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With emphasis, and also with good sense⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing in footing indispensable;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He danced without theatrical pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not like a ballet-master in the van</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his drilled nymphs, but like a gentleman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Chaste were his steps, each kept within due bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Elegance was sprinkled o’er his figure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like swift Camilla, he scarce skimmed the ground,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1075" id="noteref-1075" epub:type="noteref">1075</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather held in than put forth his vigour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then he had an ear for Music’s sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which might defy a crotchet critic’s rigour.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such classic pas⁠—sans flaws⁠—set off our hero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He glanced like a personified Bolero;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1076" id="noteref-1076" epub:type="noteref">1076</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or like a flying Hour before Aurora,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Guido’s famous fresco<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1077" id="noteref-1077" epub:type="noteref">1077</a> (which alone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is worth a tour to Rome, although no more a</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remnant were there of the old World’s sole throne):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The “<i xml:lang="fr">tout ensemble</i>” of his movements wore a</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grace of the soft Ideal, seldom shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ne’er to be described; for to the dolour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bards and prosers, words are void of colour.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No marvel then he was a favourite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A full-grown Cupid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1078" id="noteref-1078" epub:type="noteref">1078</a> very much admired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little spoilt, but by no means so quite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least he kept his vanity retired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was his tact, he could alike delight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The chaste, and those who are not so much inspired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Duchess of Fitz-Fulke, who loved <i xml:lang="fr">tracasserie</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to treat him with some small <i xml:lang="fr">agacerie</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She was a fine and somewhat full-blown blonde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Desirable, distinguished, celebrated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For several winters in the grand, <i xml:lang="fr">grand Monde</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’d rather not say what might be related</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her exploits, for this were ticklish ground;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides there might be falsehood in what’s stated:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her late performance had been a dead set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Lord Augustus Fitz-Plantagenet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This noble personage began to look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little black upon this new flirtation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such small licences must lovers brook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mere freedoms of the female corporation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woe to the man who ventures a rebuke!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twill but precipitate a situation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extremely disagreeable, but common</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To calculators when they count on Woman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The circle smiled, then whispered, and then sneered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The misses bridled, and the matrons frowned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hoped things might not turn out as they feared;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some would not deem such women could be found;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some ne’er believed one half of what they heard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some looked perplexed, and others looked profound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And several pitied with sincere regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Lord Augustus Fitz-Plantagenet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what is odd, none ever named the Duke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, one might think, was something in the affair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>True, he was absent, and, ’twas rumoured, took</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But small concern about the when, or where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or what his consort did: if he could brook</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her gaieties, none had a right to stare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Theirs was that best of unions, past all doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which never meets, and therefore can’t fall out.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, oh! that I should ever pen so sad a line!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fired with an abstract love of Virtue, she,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Dian of the Ephesians, Lady Adeline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to think the Duchess’ conduct free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Regretting much that she had chosen so bad a line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And waxing chiller in her courtesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Looked grave and pale to see her friend’s fragility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which most friends reserve their sensibility.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There’s nought in this bad world like sympathy:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis so becoming to the soul and face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sets to soft music the harmonious sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And robes sweet Friendship in a Brussels lace.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a friend, what were Humanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hunt our errors up with a good grace?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consoling us with⁠—“Would you had thought twice!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! if you had but followed my advice!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Job! you had two friends: one’s quite enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially when we are ill at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re but bad pilots when the weather’s rough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Doctors less famous for their cures than fees.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let no man grumble when his friends fall off,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As they will do like leaves at the first breeze:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When your affairs come round, one way or t’ other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Go to the coffee-house, and take another.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1079" id="noteref-1079" epub:type="noteref">1079</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But this is not my maxim: had it been,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some heart-aches had been spared me: yet I care not⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I would not be a tortoise in his screen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of stubborn shell, which waves and weather wear not:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis better on the whole to have felt and seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That which Humanity may bear, or bear not:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twill teach discernment to the sensitive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not to pour their Ocean in a sieve.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of all the horrid, hideous notes of woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sadder than owl-songs or the midnight blast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that portentous phrase, “I told you so,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Uttered by friends, those prophets of the <em>past</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, ’stead of saying what you <em>now</em> should do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Own they foresaw that you would fall at last,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1080" id="noteref-1080" epub:type="noteref">1080</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And solace your slight lapse ’gainst <i xml:lang="la">bonos mores</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a long memorandum of old stories.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Lady Adeline’s serene severity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not confined to feeling for her friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose fame she rather doubted with posterity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless her habits should begin to mend:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Juan also shared in her austerity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mixed with pity, pure as e’er was penned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Inexperience moved her gentle ruth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (as her junior by six weeks) his Youth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These forty days’ advantage of her years⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hers were those which can face calculation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boldly referring to the list of Peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And noble births, nor dread the enumeration⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave her a right to have maternal fears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For a young gentleman’s fit education,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though she was far from that leap year, whose leap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In female dates, strikes Time all of a heap.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This may be fixed at somewhere before thirty⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Say seven-and-twenty; for I never knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strictest in chronology and virtue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Advance beyond, while they could pass for new.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Time! why dost not pause? Thy scythe, so dirty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With rust, should surely cease to hack and hew:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reset it⁠—shave more smoothly, also slower,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If but to keep thy credit as a mower.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Adeline was far from that ripe age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose ripeness is but bitter at the best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas rather her Experience made her sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she had seen the World and stood its test,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I have said in⁠—I forget what page;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Muse despises reference, as you have guessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this time;⁠—but strike six from seven-and-twenty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you will find her sum of years in plenty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At sixteen she came out; presented, vaunted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She put all coronets into commotion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At seventeen, too, the World was still enchanted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the new Venus of their brilliant Ocean:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At eighteen, though below her feet still panted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Hecatomb of suitors with devotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had consented to create again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Adam, called “The happiest of Men.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Since then she had sparkled through three glowing winters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admired, adored; but also so correct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she had puzzled all the acutest hinters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the apparel of being circumspect:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not even glean the slightest splinters</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From off the marble, which had no defect.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had also snatched a moment since her marriage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear a son and heir⁠—and one miscarriage.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fondly the wheeling fire-flies flew around her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those little glitterers of the London night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But none of these possessed a sting to wound her⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was a pitch beyond a coxcomb’s flight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps she wished an aspirant profounder;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whatsoe’er she wished, she acted right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether Coldness, Pride, or Virtue dignify</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Woman⁠—so she’s good⁠—what <em>does</em> it signify?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I hate a motive, like a lingering bottle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which with the landlord makes too long a stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving all-claretless the unmoistened throttle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially with politics on hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate it, as I hate a drove of cattle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who whirl the dust as Simooms whirl the sand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate it as I hate an argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Laureate’s Ode, or servile Peer’s “Content.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis sad to hack into the roots of things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are so much intertwisted with the earth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the branch a goodly verdure flings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I reck not if an acorn gave it birth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To trace all actions to their secret springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would make indeed some melancholy mirth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is not at present my concern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I refer you to wise Oxenstiern.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1081" id="noteref-1081" epub:type="noteref">1081</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With the kind view of saving an éclat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both to the Duchess and Diplomatist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Lady Adeline, as soon’s she saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Juan was unlikely to resist⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For foreigners don’t know that a faux pas</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In England ranks quite on a different list</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From those of other lands unblest with juries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose verdict for such sin a certain cure is;⁠—)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1082" id="noteref-1082" epub:type="noteref">1082</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Lady Adeline resolved to take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such measures as she thought might best impede</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The farther progress of this sad mistake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thought with some simplicity indeed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Innocence is bold even at the stake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And simple in the World, and doth not need</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor use those palisades by dames erected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose virtue lies in never being detected.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was not that she feared the very worst:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Grace was an enduring, married man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was not likely all at once to burst</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a scene, and swell the clients’ clan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Doctors’ Commons; but she dreaded first</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The magic of her Grace’s talisman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next a quarrel (as he seemed to fret)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Lord Augustus Fitz-Plantagenet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her Grace, too, passed for being an <i xml:lang="it">intrigante</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And somewhat <i xml:lang="fr">méchante</i> in her amorous sphere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One of those pretty, precious plagues, which haunt</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lover with caprices soft and dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That like to <em>make</em> a quarrel, when they can’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Find one, each day of the delightful year:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bewitching, torturing, as they freeze or glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And⁠—what is worst of all⁠—won’t let you go:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The sort of thing to turn a young man’s head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or make a Werter of him in the end.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No wonder then a purer soul should dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This sort of chaste liaison for a friend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It were much better to be wed or dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than wear a heart a Woman loves to rend.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis best to pause, and think, ere you rush on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that a <i xml:lang="fr">bonne fortune</i> be really <i xml:lang="fr">bonne</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And first, in the overflowing of her heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which really knew or thought it knew no guile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She called her husband now and then apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bade him counsel Juan. With a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord Henry heard her plans of artless art</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To wean Don Juan from the Siren’s wile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And answered, like a statesman or a prophet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such guise that she could make nothing of it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Firstly, he said, “he never interfered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In anybody’s business but the King’s:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next, that “he never judged from what appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without strong reason, of those sort of things:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thirdly, that “Juan had more brain than beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was not to be held in leading strings;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fourthly, what need hardly be said twice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That good but rarely came from good advice.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, therefore, doubtless to approve the truth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the last axiom, he advised his spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave the parties to themselves, forsooth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least as far as <i xml:lang="fr">bienséance</i> allows:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1083" id="noteref-1083" epub:type="noteref">1083</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That time would temper Juan’s faults of youth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That young men rarely made monastic vows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Opposition only more attaches⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here a messenger brought in despatches:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And being of the council called “the Privy,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lord Henry walked into his cabinet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To furnish matter for some future Livy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To tell how he reduced the Nation’s debt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if their full contents I do not give ye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is because I do not know them yet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I shall add them in a brief appendix,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To come between mine Epic and its index.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ere he went, he added a slight hint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Another gentle common-place or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as are coined in Conversation’s mint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pass, for want of better, though not new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then broke his packet, to see what was in ’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having casually glanced it through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retired: and, as he went out, calmly kissed her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less like a young wife than an agèd sister.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was a cold, good, honourable man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of his birth, and proud of everything;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A goodly spirit for a state Divan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A figure fit to walk before a King;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tall, stately, formed to lead the courtly van</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On birthdays, glorious with a star and string;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very model of a chamberlain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such I mean to make him when I reign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But there was something wanting on the whole⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I don’t know what, and therefore cannot tell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which pretty women⁠—the sweet souls!⁠—call <em>soul</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Certes it was not body; he was well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proportioned, as a poplar or a pole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A handsome man, that human miracle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in each circumstance of Love or War</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had still preserved his perpendicular.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Still there was something wanting, as I’ve said⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That undefinable “<i xml:lang="fr">Je ne sçais quoi</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, for what I know, may of yore have led</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Homer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i>, since it drew to Troy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Greek Eve, Helen, from the Spartan’s bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though on the whole, no doubt, the Dardan boy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was much inferior to King Menelaüs:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thus it is some women will betray us.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is an awkward thing which much perplexes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless like wise Tiresias<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1084" id="noteref-1084" epub:type="noteref">1084</a> we had proved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By turns the difference of the several sexes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neither can show quite <em>how</em> they would be loved.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sensual for a short time but connects us⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sentimental boasts to be unmoved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But both together form a kind of Centaur,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon whose back ’tis better not to venture.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A something all-sufficient for the <em>heart</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is that for which the sex are always seeking:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But how to fill up that same vacant part?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There lies the rub⁠—and this they are but weak in.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frail mariners afloat without a chart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They run before the wind through high seas breaking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they have made the shore through every shock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis odd⁠—or odds⁠—it may turn out a rock.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is a flower called “Love in Idleness,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1085" id="noteref-1085" epub:type="noteref">1085</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which see Shakespeare’s ever-blooming garden;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not make his great description less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beg his British godship’s humble pardon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If, in my extremity of rhyme’s distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I touch a single leaf where he is warden;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, though the flower is different, with the French</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Swiss Rousseau⁠—cry “<i xml:lang="fr">Voilà la Pervenche!</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1086" id="noteref-1086" epub:type="noteref">1086</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Eureka! I have found it! What I mean</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To say is, not that Love is Idleness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that in Love such idleness has been</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An accessory, as I have cause to guess.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hard Labour’s an indifferent go-between;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your men of business are not apt to express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much passion, since the merchant-ship, the Argo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conveyed Medea as her supercargo.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Beatus ille procul!</i>” from “<i xml:lang="la">negotiis</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1087" id="noteref-1087" epub:type="noteref">1087</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saith Horace; the great little poet’s wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His other maxim, “<i xml:lang="la">Noscitur à sociis</i>,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1088" id="noteref-1088" epub:type="noteref">1088</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is much more to the purpose of his song;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though even that were sometimes too ferocious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless good company be kept too long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, in his teeth, whate’er their state or station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thrice happy they who <em>have</em> an occupation!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Adam exchanged his Paradise for ploughing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eve made up millinery with fig leaves⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The earliest knowledge from the Tree so knowing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far as I know, that the Church receives:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since that time it need not cost much showing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That many of the ills o’er which Man grieves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still more Women, spring from not employing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hours to make the remnant worth enjoying.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And hence high life is oft a dreary void,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rack of pleasures, where we must invent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A something wherewithal to be annoyed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bards may sing what they please about <em>Content</em>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Contented</em>, when translated, means but cloyed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hence arise the woes of Sentiment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blue-devils⁠—and Blue-stockings⁠—and Romances</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Reduced to practice, and performed like dances.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I do declare, upon an affidavit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Romances I ne’er read like those I have seen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor, if unto the World I ever gave it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would some believe that such a tale had been:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such intent I never had, nor have it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some truths are better kept behind a screen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Especially when they would look like lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I therefore deal in generalities.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1089" id="noteref-1089" epub:type="noteref">1089</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“An oyster may be crossed in love”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1090" id="noteref-1090" epub:type="noteref">1090</a>⁠—and why?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he mopeth idly in his shell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And heaves a lonely subterraqueous sigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much as a monk may do within his cell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And à-propos of monks, their Piety</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With Sloth hath found it difficult to dwell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those vegetables of the Catholic creed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are apt exceedingly to run to seed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Wilberforce! thou man of black renown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose merit none enough can sing or say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou hast struck one immense Colossus down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou moral Washington of Africa!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there’s another little thing, I own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which you should perpetrate some summer’s day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And set the other half of Earth to rights;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You have freed the <em>blacks</em>⁠—now pray shut up the whites.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Shut up the bald-coot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1091" id="noteref-1091" epub:type="noteref">1091</a> bully Alexander!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ship off the Holy Three to Senegal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Teach them that “sauce for goose is sauce for gander,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ask them how <em>they</em> like to be in thrall?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut up each high heroic Salamander,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who eats fire gratis (since the pay’s but small);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shut up⁠—no, <em>not</em> the King, but the Pavilion,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1092" id="noteref-1092" epub:type="noteref">1092</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or else ’t will cost us all another million.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Shut up the World at large, let Bedlam out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you will be perhaps surprised to find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All things pursue exactly the same route,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As now with those of soi-disant sound mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This I could prove beyond a single doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were there a jot of sense among Mankind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But till that <i xml:lang="fr">point d’appui</i> is found, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Archimedes, I leave Earth as ’twas.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our gentle Adeline had one defect⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her heart was vacant, though a splendid mansion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her conduct had been perfectly correct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As she had seen nought claiming its expansion.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wavering spirit may be easier wrecked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because ’tis frailer, doubtless, than a staunch one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when the latter works its own undoing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its inner crash is like an Earthquake’s ruin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She loved her Lord, or thought so; but <em>that</em> love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cost her an effort, which is a sad toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stone of Sisyphus, if once we move</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our feelings ’gainst the nature of the soil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had nothing to complain of, or reprove,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No bickerings, no connubial turmoil:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their union was a model to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serene and noble⁠—conjugal, but cold.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was no great disparity of years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though much in temper; but they never clashed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They moved like stars united in their spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or like the Rhone by Leman’s waters washed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where mingled and yet separate appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The River from the Lake, all bluely dashed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the serene and placid glassy deep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which fain would lull its river-child to sleep.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1093" id="noteref-1093" epub:type="noteref">1093</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now when she once had ta’en an interest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In anything, however she might flatter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself that her intentions were the best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Intense intentions are a dangerous matter:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impressions were much stronger than she guessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And gathered as they run like growing water</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon her mind; the more so, as her breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was not at first too readily impressed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But when it was, she had that lurking Demon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of double nature, and thus doubly named⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firmness yclept in Heroes, Kings, and seamen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is, when they succeed; but greatly blamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As <em>Obstinacy</em>, both in Men and Women,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whene’er their triumph pales, or star is tamed:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ’t will perplex the casuist in morality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To fix the due bounds of this dangerous quality.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Had Bonaparte won at Waterloo,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It had been firmness; now ’tis pertinacity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must the event decide between the two?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I leave it to your people of sagacity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To draw the line between the false and true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If such can e’er be drawn by Man’s capacity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My business is with Lady Adeline,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in her way too was a heroine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She knew not her own heart; then how should I?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think not she was <em>then</em> in love with Juan:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If so, she would have had the strength to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wild sensation, unto her a new one:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She merely felt a common sympathy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I will not say it was a false or true one)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In him, because she thought he was in danger⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her husband’s friend⁠—her own⁠—young⁠—and a stranger.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She was, or thought she was, his friend⁠—and this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the farce of Friendship, or romance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Platonism, which leads so oft amiss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ladies who have studied Friendship but in France</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Germany, where people <em>purely</em> kiss.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1094" id="noteref-1094" epub:type="noteref">1094</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To thus much Adeline would not advance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of such friendship as Man’s may to Man be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was as capable as Woman can be.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>No doubt the secret influence of the Sex</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will there, as also in the ties of blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An innocent predominance annex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tune the concord to a finer mood.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1095" id="noteref-1095" epub:type="noteref">1095</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If free from Passion, which all Friendship checks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And your true feelings fully understood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No friend like to a woman Earth discovers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that you have not been nor will be lovers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Love bears within its breast the very germ</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Change; and how should this be otherwise?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That violent things more quickly find a term</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is shown through Nature’s whole analogies;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1096" id="noteref-1096" epub:type="noteref">1096</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how should the most fierce of all be firm?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would you have endless lightning in the skies?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks Love’s very title says enough:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How should “the <em>tender</em> passion” e’er be <em>tough</em>?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! by all experience, seldom yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I merely quote what I have heard from many)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had lovers not some reason to regret</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The passion which made Solomon a zany.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1097" id="noteref-1097" epub:type="noteref">1097</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve also seen some wives (not to forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The marriage state, the best or worst of any)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who were the very paragons of wives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet made the misery of at least two lives.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1098" id="noteref-1098" epub:type="noteref">1098</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’ve also seen some female <em>friends</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1099" id="noteref-1099" epub:type="noteref">1099</a> (’tis odd,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1100" id="noteref-1100" epub:type="noteref">1100</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But true⁠—as, if expedient, I could prove)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That faithful were through thick and thin, abroad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1101" id="noteref-1101" epub:type="noteref">1101</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At home, far more than ever yet was Love⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who did not quit me when Oppression trod</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon me; whom no scandal could remove;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fought, and fight, in absence, too, my battles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despite the snake Society’s loud rattles.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whether Don Juan and chaste Adeline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Grew friends in this or any other sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will be discussed hereafter, I opine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At present I am glad of a pretence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To leave them hovering, as the effect is fine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And keeps the atrocious reader in <em>suspense</em>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The surest way⁠—for ladies and for books⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bait their tender⁠—or their tenter⁠—hooks.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whether they rode, or walked, or studied Spanish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To read Don Quixote in the original,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pleasure before which all others vanish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether their talk was of the kind called “small,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or serious, are the topics I must banish</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the next Canto; where perhaps I shall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Say something to the purpose, and display</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Considerable talent in my way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Above all, I beg all men to forbear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Anticipating aught about the matter:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’ll only make mistakes about the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan, too, especially the latter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I shall take a much more serious air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than I have yet done, in this Epic Satire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not clear that Adeline and Juan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will fall; but if they do, ’t will be their ruin.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But great things spring from little:⁠—Would you think,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in our youth, as dangerous a passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As e’er brought Man and Woman to the brink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ruin, rose from such a slight occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As few would ever dream could form the link</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such a sentimental situation?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll never guess, I’ll bet you millions, milliards⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1102" id="noteref-1102" epub:type="noteref">1102</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>It all sprung from a harmless game at billiards.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis strange⁠—but true; for Truth is always strange⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stranger than fiction: if it could be told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How much would novels gain by the exchange!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How differently the World would men behold!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How oft would Vice and Virtue places change!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The new world would be nothing to the old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If some Columbus of the moral seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would show mankind their Souls’ antipodes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-14-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What “antres vast and deserts idle,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1103" id="noteref-1103" epub:type="noteref">1103</a> then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be discovered in the human soul!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What icebergs in the hearts of mighty men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With self-love in the centre as their Pole!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What Anthropophagi are nine of ten</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those who hold the kingdoms in control!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were things but only called by their right name,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Caesar himself would be ashamed of Fame.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1104" id="noteref-1104" epub:type="noteref">1104</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
