<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XVII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
				<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-17-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The world is full of orphans: firstly, those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who are so in the strict sense of the phrase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But many a lonely tree the loftier grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than others crowded in the Forest’s maze⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next are such as are not doomed to lose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tender parents, in their budding days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, merely, their parental tenderness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which leaves them orphans of the heart no less.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The next are “<i>only</i> Children,” as they are styled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who grow up <i>Children</i> only, since th’ old saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pronounces that an “only’s” a spoilt child⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not to go too far, I hold it law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That where their education, harsh or mild,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transgresses the great bounds of love or awe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sufferers⁠—be ’t in heart or intellect⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er the <i>cause</i>, are orphans in <i>effect</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to return unto the stricter rule⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far as words make rules⁠—our common notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of orphan paints at once a parish school,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A half-starved babe, a wreck upon Life’s ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A human (what the Italians nickname) “Mule!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A theme for Pity or some worse emotion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, if examined, it might be admitted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wealthiest orphans are to be more pitied.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Too soon they are Parents to themselves: for what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are Tutors, Guardians, and so forth, compared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Nature’s genial Genitors? so that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A child of Chancery, that Star-Chamber ward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I’ll take the likeness I can first come at,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is like⁠—a duckling by Dame Partlett reared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And frights⁠—especially if ’tis a daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Th’ old Hen⁠—by running headlong to the water.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is a common-place book argument,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which glibly glides from every tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When any dare a new light to present,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“If you are right, then everybody’s wrong”!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suppose the converse of this precedent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So often urged, so loudly and so long;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If you are wrong, then everybody’s right”!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was ever everybody yet so quite?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Therefore I would solicit free discussion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon all points⁠—no matter what, or whose⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because as Ages upon Ages push on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last is apt the former to accuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of pillowing its head on a pin-cushion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heedless of pricks because it was obtuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What was a paradox becomes a truth or</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A something like it⁠—witness Luther!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Sacraments have been reduced to two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Witches unto none, though somewhat late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since burning agéd women (save a few⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not witches only b⁠—ches⁠—who create</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mischief in families, as some know or knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Should still be singed, but lightly, let me state,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has been declared an act of inurbanity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Malgré</i> Sir Matthew Hales’s great humanity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Great Galileo was debarred the Sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he fixed it; and, to stop his talking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Earth could round the solar orbit run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found his own legs embargoed from mere walking:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The man was well-nigh dead, ere men begun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think his skull had not some need of caulking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now, it seems, he’s right⁠—his notion just:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt a consolation to his dust.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Pythagoras, Locke, Socrates⁠—but pages</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might be filled up, as vainly as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the sad usage of all sorts of sages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in his life-time, each, was deemed a Bore!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loftiest minds outrun their tardy ages:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This they must bear with and, perhaps, much more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wise man’s sure when he no more can share it, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will have a firm Post Obit on posterity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If such doom waits each intellectual Giant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We little people in our lesser way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Life’s small rubs should surely be more pliant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so for one will I⁠—as well I may⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would that I were less bilious⁠—but, oh, fie on ’t!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as I make my mind up every day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be a “<i>totus, teres</i>,” Stoic, Sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind shifts and I fly into a rage.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Temperate I am⁠—yet never had a temper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Modest I am⁠—yet with some slight assurance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changeable too⁠—yet somehow “<i>Idem semper</i>:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Patient⁠—but not enamoured of endurance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cheerful⁠—but, sometimes, rather apt to whimper:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mild⁠—but at times a sort of “<i>Hercules furens</i>:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I almost think that the same skin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one without⁠—has two or three within.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our Hero was, in Canto the Sixteenth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Left in a tender moonlight situation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as enables Man to show his strength</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Moral or physical: on this occasion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether his virtue triumphed⁠—or, at length,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His vice⁠—for he was of a kindling nation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is more than I shall venture to describe;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless some Beauty with a kiss should bribe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I leave the thing a problem, like all things:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The morning came⁠—and breakfast, tea and toast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which most men partake, but no one sings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The company whose birth, wealth, worth, has cost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My trembling Lyre already several strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Assembled with our hostess, and mine host;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guests dropped in⁠—the last but one, Her Grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The latest, Juan, with his virgin face.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-17-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Which best it is to encounter⁠—Ghost, or none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twere difficult to say⁠—but Juan looked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if he had combated with more than one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being wan and worn, with eyes that hardly brooked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The light, that through the Gothic window shone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Grace, too, had a sort of air rebuked⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed pale and shivered, as if she had kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vigil, or dreamt rather more than slept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
