<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-11-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Bishop Berkeley said “there was no matter,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-858" id="noteref-858" epub:type="noteref">858</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And proved it⁠—‘t was no matter what he said:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They say his system ’t is in vain to batter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too subtle for the airiest human head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet who can believe it? I would shatter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gladly all matters down to stone or lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or adamant, to find the World a spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wear my head, denying that I wear it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What a sublime discovery ’t was to make the</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Universe universal egotism,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all’s ideal⁠—<i>all ourselves!</i>⁠—I’ll stake the</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">World (be it what you will) that <i>that’s</i> no schism.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh Doubt!⁠—if thou be’st Doubt, for which some take thee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But which I doubt extremely⁠—thou sole prism</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the Truth’s rays, spoil not my draught of spirit!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven’s brandy, though our brain can hardly bear it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For ever and anon comes Indigestion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Not the most “dainty Ariel”),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-859" id="noteref-859" epub:type="noteref">859</a> and perplexes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our soarings with another sort of question:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that which after all my spirit vexes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is, that I find no spot where Man can rest eye on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without confusion of the sorts and sexes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Beings, Stars, and this unriddled wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World, which at the worst’s a <i>glorious</i> blunder⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If it be chance⁠—or, if it be according</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the old text, still better:⁠—lest it should</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turn out so, we ’ll say nothing ’gainst the wording,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As several people think such hazards rude.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They’re right; our days are too brief for affording</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Space to dispute what <i>no one</i> ever could</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decide, and <i>everybody one day</i> will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know very clearly⁠—or at least lie still.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore will I leave off metaphysical</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discussion, which is neither here nor there:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I agree that what is, is; then this I call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being quite perspicuous and extremely fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The truth is, I’ve grown lately rather phthisical:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-860" id="noteref-860" epub:type="noteref">860</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I don’t know what the reason is⁠—the air</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps; but as I suffer from the shocks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of illness, I grow much more orthodox.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The first attack at once proved the Divinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(But that I never doubted, nor the Devil);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The next, the Virgin’s mystical virginity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The third, the usual Origin of Evil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fourth at once established the whole Trinity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On so uncontrovertible a level,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I devoutly wished the three were four⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On purpose to believe so much the more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To our theme.⁠—The man who has stood on the Acropolis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked down over Attica; or he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who has sailed where picturesque Constantinople is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or seen Timbuctoo, or hath taken tea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In small-eyed China’s crockery-ware metropolis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sat amidst the bricks of Nineveh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-861" id="noteref-861" epub:type="noteref">861</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>May not think much of London’s first appearance⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ask him what he thinks of it a year hence!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan had got out on Shooter’s Hill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sunset the time, the place the same declivity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which looks along that vale of Good and Ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where London streets ferment in full activity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While everything around was calm and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except the creak of wheels, which on their pivot he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heard⁠—and that bee-like, bubbling, busy hum</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of cities, that boil over with their scum:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I say, Don Juan, wrapped in contemplation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Walked on behind his carriage, o’er the summit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lost in wonder of so great a nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave way to ’t, since he could not overcome it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“And here,” he cried, “is Freedom’s chosen station;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here peals the People’s voice, nor can entomb it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Racks⁠—prisons⁠—inquisitions; Resurrection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Awaits it, each new meeting or election.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Here are chaste wives, pure lives; here people pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what they please; and if that things be dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is only that they love to throw away</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their cash, to show how much they have a-year.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here laws are all inviolate⁠—none lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Traps for the traveller⁠—every highway’s clear⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here”⁠—he was interrupted by a knife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With⁠—“Damn your eyes! your money or your life!”⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These free-born sounds proceeded from four pads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In ambush laid, who had perceived him loiter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Behind his carriage; and, like handy lads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had seized the lucky hour to reconnoitre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which the heedless gentleman who gads</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the road, unless he prove a fighter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May find himself within that isle of riches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exposed to lose his life as well as breeches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, who did not understand a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of English, save their shibboleth, “God damn!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-862" id="noteref-862" epub:type="noteref">862</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even that he had so rarely heard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sometimes thought ’t was only their “Salām,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or “God be with you!”⁠—and ’t is not absurd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think so⁠—for half English as I am</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(To my misfortune), never can I say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard them wish “God with you,” save that way;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan yet quickly understood their gesture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being somewhat choleric and sudden,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew forth a pocket pistol from his vesture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fired it into one assailant’s pudding⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fell, as rolls an ox o’er in his pasture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And roared out, as he writhed his native mud in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto his nearest follower or henchman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Oh Jack! I’m floored by that ’ere bloody Frenchman!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On which Jack and his train set off at speed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan’s suite, late scattered at a distance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came up, all marvelling at such a deed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And offering, as usual, late assistance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan, who saw the moon’s late minion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-863" id="noteref-863" epub:type="noteref">863</a> bleed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if his veins would pour out his existence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood calling out for bandages and lint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wished he had been less hasty with his flint.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Perhaps,” thought he, “it is the country’s wont</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To welcome foreigners in this way: now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I recollect some innkeepers who don’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Differ, except in robbing with a bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In lieu of a bare blade and brazen front⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what is to be done? I can’t allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fellow to lie groaning on the road:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So take him up⁠—I’ll help you with the load.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ere they could perform this pious duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dying man cried, “Hold! I’ve got my gruel!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh! for a glass of <i>max</i>!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-864" id="noteref-864" epub:type="noteref">864</a> We’ve missed our booty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let me die where I am!” And as the fuel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Life shrunk in his heart, and thick and sooty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The drops fell from his death-wound, and he drew ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His breath⁠—he from his swelling throat untied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kerchief, crying, “Give Sal that!”⁠—and died.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The cravat stained with bloody drops fell down</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before Don Juan’s feet: he could not tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exactly why it was before him thrown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor what the meaning of the man’s farewell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor Tom was once a kiddy upon town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thorough varmint, and a <i>real</i> swell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full flash,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-865" id="noteref-865" epub:type="noteref">865</a> all fancy, until fairly diddled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His pockets first and then his body riddled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan, having done the best he could</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the circumstances of the case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as “Crowner’s quest”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-866" id="noteref-866" epub:type="noteref">866</a> allowed, pursued</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His travels to the capital apace;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Esteeming it a little hard he should</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In twelve hours’ time, and very little space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have been obliged to slay a free-born native</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In self-defence: this made him meditative.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He from the world had cut off a great man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who in his time had made heroic bustle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who in a row like Tom could lead the van,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Booze in the ken, or at the spellken hustle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who queer a flat?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-867" id="noteref-867" epub:type="noteref">867</a> Who (spite of Bow-street’s ban)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the high toby-spice so flash the muzzle?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who on a lark with black-eyed Sal (his blowing),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So prime⁠—so swell⁠—so nutty⁠—and so knowing?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-868" id="noteref-868" epub:type="noteref">868</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-869" id="noteref-869" epub:type="noteref">869</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Tom’s no more⁠—and so no more of Tom.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heroes must die; and by God’s blessing ’t is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not long before the most of them go home.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hail! Thamis, hail! Upon thy verge it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Juan’s chariot, rolling like a drum</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In thunder, holds the way it can’t well miss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through Kennington and all the other “tons,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which make us wish ourselves in town at once;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Through Groves, so called as being void of trees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Like <i>lucus</i> from <i>no</i> light); through prospects named</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mount Pleasant, as containing nought to please,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor much to climb; through little boxes framed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of bricks, to let the dust in at your ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With “To be let,” upon their doors proclaimed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through “Rows” most modestly called “Paradise,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-870" id="noteref-870" epub:type="noteref">870</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Eve might quit without much sacrifice;⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-871" id="noteref-871" epub:type="noteref">871</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Through coaches, drays, choked turnpikes, and a whirl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wheels, and roar of voices, and confusion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here taverns wooing to a pint of “purl,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-872" id="noteref-872" epub:type="noteref">872</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There mails fast flying off like a delusion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There barbers’ blocks with periwigs in curl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In windows; here the lamplighter’s infusion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slowly distilled into the glimmering glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For in those days we had not got to gas⁠—);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-873" id="noteref-873" epub:type="noteref">873</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-874" id="noteref-874" epub:type="noteref">874</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Through this, and much, and more, is the approach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of travellers to mighty Babylon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether they come by horse, or chaise, or coach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With slight exceptions, all the ways seem one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could say more, but do not choose to encroach</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the Guide-book’s privilege. The Sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had set some time, and night was on the ridge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of twilight, as the party crossed the bridge.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That’s rather fine, the gentle sound of Thamis⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who vindicates a moment, too, his stream⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though hardly heard through multifarious “damme’s:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The lamps of Westminster’s more regular gleam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The breadth of pavement, and yon shrine where Fame is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A spectral resident⁠—whose pallid beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In shape of moonshine hovers o’er the pile⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make this a sacred part of Albion’s isle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Druids’ groves are gone⁠—so much the better:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stonehenge is not⁠—but what the devil is it?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Bedlam still exists with its sage fetter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That madmen may not bite you on a visit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Bench too seats or suits full many a debtor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Mansion House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-875" id="noteref-875" epub:type="noteref">875</a> too (though some people quiz it),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me appears a stiff yet grand erection;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then the Abbey’s worth the whole collection.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The line of lights,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-876" id="noteref-876" epub:type="noteref">876</a> too, up to Charing Cross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pall Mall, and so forth, have a coruscation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like gold as in comparison to dross,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Matched with the Continent’s illumination,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose cities Night by no means deigns to gloss.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The French were not yet a lamp-lighting nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when they grew so⁠—on their new-found lantern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of wicks, they made a wicked man turn.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-877" id="noteref-877" epub:type="noteref">877</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A row of Gentlemen along the streets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspended may illuminate mankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As also bonfires made of country seats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the old way is best for the purblind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The other looks like phosphorus on sheets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sort of <i>ignis fatuus</i> to the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, though ’t is certain to perplex and frighten,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must burn more mildly ere it can enlighten.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But London’s so well lit, that if Diogenes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could recommence to hunt his <i>honest man</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And found him not amidst the various progenies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this enormous City’s spreading span,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T were not for want of lamps to aid his dodging his</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet undiscovered treasure. What <i>I</i> can,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve done to find the same throughout Life’s journey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But see the World is only one attorney.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Over the stones still rattling, up Pall Mall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through crowds and carriages, but waxing thinner</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As thundered knockers broke the long sealed spell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of doors ’gainst duns, and to an early dinner</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admitted a small party as night fell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Don Juan, our young diplomatic sinner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursued his path, and drove past some hotels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Palace, and <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s “Hells.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-878" id="noteref-878" epub:type="noteref">878</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They reached the hotel: forth streamed from the front door<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-879" id="noteref-879" epub:type="noteref">879</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A tide of well-clad waiters, and around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mob stood, and as usual several score</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those pedestrian Paphians who abound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In decent London when the daylight’s o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Commodious but immoral, they are found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Useful, like Malthus, in promoting marriage.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Juan now is stepping from his carriage</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Into one of the sweetest of hotels,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-880" id="noteref-880" epub:type="noteref">880</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-881" id="noteref-881" epub:type="noteref">881</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially for foreigners⁠—and mostly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For those whom favour or whom Fortune swells,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cannot find a bill’s small items costly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There many an envoy either dwelt or dwells</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The den of many a diplomatic lost lie),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until to some conspicuous square they pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And blazon o’er the door their names in brass.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, whose was a delicate commission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Private, though publicly important, bore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No title to point out with due precision</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The exact affair on which he was sent o’er.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T was merely known, that on a secret mission</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A foreigner of rank had graced our shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young, handsome, and accomplished, who was said</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(In whispers) to have turned his Sovereign’s head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some rumour also of some strange adventures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had gone before him, and his wars and loves;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as romantic heads are pretty painters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, above all, an Englishwoman’s roves<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-882" id="noteref-882" epub:type="noteref">882</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into the excursive, breaking the indentures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sober reason, wheresoe’er it moves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found himself extremely in the fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which serves our thinking people for a passion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I don’t mean that they are passionless, but quite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The contrary; but then ’t is in the head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet as the consequences are as bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if they acted with the heart instead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What after all can signify the site</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ladies’ lucubrations? So they lead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In safety to the place for which you start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What matters if the road be head or heart?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan presented in the proper place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To proper placemen, every Russ credential;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And was received with all the due grimace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By those who govern in the mood potential,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, seeing a handsome stripling with smooth face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thought (what in state affairs is most essential),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they as easily might <i>do</i> the youngster,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hawks may pounce upon a woodland songster.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They erred, as agéd men will do; but by</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And by we’ll talk of that; and if we don’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T will be because our notion is not high</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of politicians and their double front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who live by lies, yet dare not boldly lie:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now what I love in women is, they won’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or can’t do otherwise than lie⁠—but do it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So well, the very Truth seems falsehood to it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And, after all, what is a lie? ’T is but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The truth in masquerade; and I defy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-883" id="noteref-883" epub:type="noteref">883</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Historians⁠—heroes⁠—lawyers⁠—priests, to put</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fact without some leaven of a lie.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very shadow of true Truth would shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Up annals⁠—revelations⁠—poesy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prophecy⁠—except it should be dated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some years before the incidents related.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Praised be all liars and all lies! Who now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can tax my mild Muse with misanthropy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rings the World’s “Te Deum,” and her brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blushes for those who will not:⁠—but to sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is idle; let us like most others bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kiss hands⁠—feet⁠—any part of Majesty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the good example of “Green Erin,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-884" id="noteref-884" epub:type="noteref">884</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose shamrock now seems rather worse for wearing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-885" id="noteref-885" epub:type="noteref">885</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan was presented, and his dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mien excited general admiration⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I don’t know which was more admired or less:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One monstrous diamond drew much observation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Catherine in a moment of <i>“ivresse”</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(In Love or Brandy’s fervent fermentation),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bestowed upon him, as the public learned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, to say truth, it had been fairly earned.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Besides the ministers and underlings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who must be courteous to the accredited</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Diplomatists of rather wavering Kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until their royal riddle’s fully read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very clerks⁠—those somewhat dirty springs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Office, or the House of Office, fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By foul corruption into streams⁠—even they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were hardly rude enough to earn their pay:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And insolence no doubt is what they are</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Employed for, since it is their daily labour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the dear offices of Peace or War;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And should you doubt, pray ask of your next neighbour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When for a passport, or some other bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To freedom, he applied (a grief and a bore),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he found not this spawn of tax-born riches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like lap-dogs, the least civil sons of b⁠⸺- s.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan was received with much <i>“empressement:”</i>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These phrases of refinement I must borrow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From our next neighbours’ land, where, like a chessman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There is a move set down for joy or sorrow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only in mere talking, but the press. Man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Islands is, it seems, downright and thorough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than on Continents⁠—as if the Sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(See Billingsgate) made even the tongue more free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And yet the British “Damme“ ’s rather Attic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your continental oaths are but incontinent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn on things which no aristocratic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spirit would name, and therefore even I won’t anent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-886" id="noteref-886" epub:type="noteref">886</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This subject quote; as it would be schismatic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In <i>politesse</i>, and have a sound affronting in’t;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But “Damme“ ’s quite ethereal, though too daring⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Platonic blasphemy⁠—the soul of swearing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-887" id="noteref-887" epub:type="noteref">887</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For downright rudeness, ye may stay at home;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For true or false politeness (and scarce <i>that</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Now</i>) you may cross the blue deep and white foam⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first the emblem (rarely though) of what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You leave behind, the next of much you come</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To meet. However, ’t is no time to chat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On general topics: poems must confine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves to unity, like this of mine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-888" id="noteref-888" epub:type="noteref">888</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In the great world⁠—which, being interpreted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Meaneth the West or worst end of a city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And about twice two thousand people bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By no means to be very wise or witty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to sit up while others lie in bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And look down on the Universe with pity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan, as an inveterate patrician,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was well received by persons of condition.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was a bachelor, which is a matter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of import both to virgin and to bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The former’s hymeneal hopes to flatter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And (should she not hold fast by Love or Pride)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is also of some moment to the latter:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A rib’s a thorn in a wed gallant’s side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Requires decorum, and is apt to double</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The horrid sin⁠—and what’s still worse, the trouble.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan was a bachelor⁠—of arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And parts, and hearts: he danced and sung, and had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An air as sentimental as Mozart’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Softest of melodies; and could be sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or cheerful, without any “flaws or starts,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-889" id="noteref-889" epub:type="noteref">889</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just at the proper time: and though a lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had seen the world⁠—which is a curious sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And very much unlike what people write.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fair virgins blushed upon him; wedded dames</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bloomed also in less transitory hues;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-890" id="noteref-890" epub:type="noteref">890</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For both commodities dwell by the Thames,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The painting and the painted; Youth, Ceruse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-891" id="noteref-891" epub:type="noteref">891</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against his heart preferred their usual claims,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as no gentleman can quite refuse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Daughters admired his dress, and pious mothers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Inquired his income, and if he had brothers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The milliners who furnish “drapery Misses”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-892" id="noteref-892" epub:type="noteref">892</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Throughout the season, upon speculation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of payment ere the Honeymoon’s last kisses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have waned into a crescent’s coruscation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought such an opportunity as this is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a rich foreigner’s initiation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not to be overlooked⁠—and gave such credit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That future bridegrooms swore, and sighed, and paid it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Blues, that tender tribe, who sigh o’er sonnets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with the pages of the last Review</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Line the interior of their heads or bonnets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Advanced in all their azure’s highest hue:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They talked bad French or Spanish, and upon its</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Late authors asked him for a hint or two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And which was softest, Russian or Castilian?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether in his travels he saw Ilion?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, who was a little superficial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not in literature a great Drawcansir,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-893" id="noteref-893" epub:type="noteref">893</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Examined by this learnéd and especial</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Jury of matrons, scarce knew what to answer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His duties warlike, loving or official,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His steady application as a dancer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had kept him from the brink of Hippocrene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which now he found was blue instead of green.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>However, he replied at hazard, with</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A modest confidence and calm assurance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which lent his learnéd lucubrations pith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And passed for arguments of good endurance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That prodigy, Miss Araminta Smith</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Who at sixteen translated “Hercules Furens”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into as furious English), with her best look,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Set down his sayings in her common-place book.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan knew several languages⁠—as well</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He might⁠—and brought them up with skill, in time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To save his fame with each accomplished belle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who still regretted that he did not rhyme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There wanted but this requisite to swell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His qualities (with them) into sublime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lady Fitz-Frisky, and Miss Maevia Mannish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both longed extremely to be sung in Spanish.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>However, he did pretty well, and was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Admitted as an aspirant to all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The coteries, and, as in Banquo’s glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At great assemblies or in parties small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He saw ten thousand living authors pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being about their average numeral;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also the eighty “greatest living poets,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-894" id="noteref-894" epub:type="noteref">894</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As every paltry magazine can show <i>it’s</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In twice five years the “greatest living poet,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like to the champion in the fisty ring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is called on to support his claim, or show it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although ’t is an imaginary thing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even I⁠—albeit I’m sure I did not know it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor sought of foolscap subjects to be king⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was reckoned, a considerable time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grand Napoleon of the realms of rhyme.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-895" id="noteref-895" epub:type="noteref">895</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan was my Moscow, and Faliero</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Leipsic, and my Mont Saint Jean seems Cain:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-896" id="noteref-896" epub:type="noteref">896</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>La Belle Alliance</i> of dunces down at zero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now that the Lion’s fallen, may rise again:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I will fall at least as fell my Hero;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor reign at all, or as a <i>monarch</i> reign;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to some lonely isle of gaolers go,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With turncoat Southey for my turnkey Lowe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-897" id="noteref-897" epub:type="noteref">897</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sir Walter reigned before me; Moore and Campbell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before and after; but now grown more holy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Muses upon Sion’s hill must ramble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With poets almost clergymen, or wholly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Pegasus has a psalmodic amble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the very Reverend Rowley Powley,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-898" id="noteref-898" epub:type="noteref">898</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-899" id="noteref-899" epub:type="noteref">899</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who shoes the glorious animal with stilts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A modern Ancient Pistol⁠—“by these hilts!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-900" id="noteref-900" epub:type="noteref">900</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Still he excels that artificial hard</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Labourer in the same vineyard, though the vine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yields him but vinegar for his reward.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That neutralised dull Dorus of the Nine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That swarthy Sporus, neither man nor bard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ox of verse, who <i>ploughs</i> for every line:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cambyses’ roaring Romans beat at least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The howling Hebrews of Cybele’s priest.⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-901" id="noteref-901" epub:type="noteref">901</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then there’s my gentle Euphues⁠—who, they say,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-902" id="noteref-902" epub:type="noteref">902</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sets up for being a sort of <i>moral me</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-903" id="noteref-903" epub:type="noteref">903</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll find it rather difficult some day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To turn out both, or either, it may be.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some persons think that Coleridge hath the sway;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Wordsworth has supporters, two or three;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that deep-mouthed Boeotian “Savage Landor”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-904" id="noteref-904" epub:type="noteref">904</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has taken for a swan rogue Southey’s gander.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>John Keats, who was killed off by one critique,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as he really promised something great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not intelligible, without Greek</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contrived to talk about the gods of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much as they might have been supposed to speak.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-905" id="noteref-905" epub:type="noteref">905</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor fellow! His was an untoward fate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is strange the mind, that very fiery particle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-906" id="noteref-906" epub:type="noteref">906</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-907" id="noteref-907" epub:type="noteref">907</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should let itself be snuffed out by an article.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The list grows long of live and dead pretenders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To that which none will gain⁠—or none will know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The conqueror at least; who, ere Time renders</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His last award, will have the long grass grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above his burnt-out brain, and sapless cinders.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I might augur, I should rate but low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their chances;⁠—they’re too numerous, like the thirty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-908" id="noteref-908" epub:type="noteref">908</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mock tyrants, when Rome’s annals waxed but dirty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This is the literary <i>lower</i> empire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the praetorian bands take up the matter;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A “dreadful trade,” like his who “gathers samphire,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-909" id="noteref-909" epub:type="noteref">909</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The insolent soldiery to soothe and flatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the same feelings as you’d coax a vampire.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now, were I once at home, and in good satire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’d try conclusions with those Janizaries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show them <i>what</i> an intellectual war is.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I think I know a trick or two, would turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their flanks;⁠—but it is hardly worth my while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such small gear to give myself concern:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indeed I’ve not the necessary bile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My natural temper’s really aught but stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And even my Muse’s worst reproof’s a smile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then she drops a brief and modern curtsy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And glides away, assured she never hurts ye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My Juan, whom I left in deadly peril</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst live poets and <i>blue</i> ladies, passed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With some small profit through that field so sterile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being tired in time⁠—and, neither least nor last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left it before he had been treated very ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And henceforth found himself more gaily classed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst the higher spirits of the day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sun’s true son, no vapour, but a ray.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His morns he passed in business⁠—which dissected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was, like all business, a laborious nothing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That leads to lassitude, the most infected</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Centaur Nessus garb of mortal clothing,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-910" id="noteref-910" epub:type="noteref">910</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And on our sofas makes us lie dejected,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And talk in tender horrors of our loathing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All kinds of toil, save for our country’s good⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which grows no better, though ’t is time it should.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His afternoons he passed in visits, luncheons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lounging and boxing; and the twilight hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In riding round those vegetable puncheons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Called “Parks,” where there is neither fruit nor flower</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Enough to gratify a bee’s slight munchings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But after all it is the only “bower”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-911" id="noteref-911" epub:type="noteref">911</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(In Moore’s phrase) where the fashionable fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can form a slight acquaintance with fresh air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then dress, then dinner, then awakes the world!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then glare the lamps, then whirl the wheels, then roar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through street and square fast flashing chariots hurled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like harnessed meteors; then along the floor</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chalk mimics painting; then festoons are twirled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then roll the brazen thunders of the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which opens to the thousand happy few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An earthly Paradise of <i>Or Molu</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There stands the noble hostess, nor shall sink</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the three-thousandth curtsy; there the waltz,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only dance which teaches girls to think,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-912" id="noteref-912" epub:type="noteref">912</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Makes one in love even with its very faults.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saloon, room, hall, o’erflow beyond their brink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long the latest of arrivals halts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Midst royal dukes and dames condemned to climb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gain an inch of staircase at a time.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thrice happy he who, after a survey</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the good company, can win a corner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A door that’s <i>in</i> or boudoir <i>out</i> of the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where he may fix himself like small “Jack Horner,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And let the Babel round run as it may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And look on as a mourner, or a scorner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or an approver, or a mere spectator,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yawning a little as the night grows later.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But this won’t do, save by and by; and he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, like Don Juan, takes an active share,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must steer with care through all that glittering sea</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gems and plumes and pearls and silks, to where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He deems it is his proper place to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissolving in the waltz to some soft air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or proudlier prancing with mercurial skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Science marshals forth her own quadrille.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or, if he dance not, but hath higher views</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon an heiress or his neighbour’s bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him take care that that which he pursues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not at once too palpably descried:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full many an eager gentleman oft rues</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His haste; Impatience is a blundering guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst a people famous for reflection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who like to play the fool with circumspection.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, if you can contrive, get next at supper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, if forestalled, get opposite and ogle:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, ye ambrosial moments! always upper</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mind, a sort of sentimental bogle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-913" id="noteref-913" epub:type="noteref">913</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which sits for ever upon Memory’s crupper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The ghost of vanished pleasures once in vogue! Ill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can tender souls relate the rise and fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of hopes and fears which shake a single ball.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But these precautionary hints can touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Only the common run, who must pursue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watch and ward; whose plans a word too much</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or little overturns; and not the few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or many (for the number’s sometimes such)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom a good mien, especially if new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or fame⁠—or name⁠—for Wit, War, Sense, or Nonsense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Permits whate’er they please⁠—or <i>did</i> not long since.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our Hero⁠—as a hero⁠—young and handsome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Noble, rich, celebrated, and a stranger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like other slaves of course must pay his ransom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before he can escape from so much danger</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As will environ a conspicuous man. Some</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Talk about poetry, and “rack and manger,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ugliness, disease, as toil and trouble;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish they knew the life of a young noble.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They are young, but know not Youth⁠—it is anticipated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Handsome but wasted, rich without a sou;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-914" id="noteref-914" epub:type="noteref">914</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their vigour in a thousand arms is dissipated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their cash comes <i>from</i>, their wealth goes <i>to</i> a Jew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both senates see their nightly votes participated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the Tyrant’s and the Tribunes’ crew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having voted, dined, drunk, gamed, and whored,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The family vault receives another Lord.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Where is the World?” cries Young, at <i>eighty</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-915" id="noteref-915" epub:type="noteref">915</a>⁠—“Where</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The World in which a man was born?” Alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is the world of <i>eight</i> years past? <i>‘T was there</i>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I look for it⁠—‘t is gone, a globe of glass!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cracked, shivered, vanished, scarcely gazed on, ere<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-916" id="noteref-916" epub:type="noteref">916</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A silent change dissolves the glittering mass.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Statesmen, Chiefs, Orators, Queens, Patriots, Kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dandies⁠—all are gone on the Wind’s wings.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where is Napoleon the Grand? God knows!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where little Castlereagh? The devil can tell!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Grattan, Curran, Sheridan⁠—all those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who bound the Bar or Senate in their spell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is the unhappy Queen, with all her woes?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where the Daughter, whom the Isles loved well?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are those martyred saints the Five per Cents?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-917" id="noteref-917" epub:type="noteref">917</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-918" id="noteref-918" epub:type="noteref">918</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And where⁠—oh, where the devil are the Rents?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where’s Brummell? Dished. Where’s Long Pole Wellesley?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-919" id="noteref-919" epub:type="noteref">919</a> Diddled.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where’s Whitbread? Romilly? Where’s George the Third?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where is his will?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-920" id="noteref-920" epub:type="noteref">920</a> (That’s not so soon unriddled.)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And where is “Fum” the Fourth, our “royal bird?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-921" id="noteref-921" epub:type="noteref">921</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gone down, it seems, to Scotland to be fiddled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto by Sawney’s violin, we have heard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Caw me, caw thee”⁠—for six months hath been hatching</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This scene of royal itch and loyal scratching.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where is Lord This? And where my Lady That?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Honourable Mistresses and Misses?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some laid aside like an old Opera hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Married, unmarried, and remarried: (this is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An evolution oft performed of late).</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where are the Dublin shouts⁠—and London hisses?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where are the Grenvilles? Turned as usual. Where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My friends the Whigs? Exactly where they were.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where are the Lady Carolines and Franceses?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-922" id="noteref-922" epub:type="noteref">922</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Divorced or doing thereanent. Ye annals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So brilliant, where the list of routs and dances is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou Morning Post, sole record of the panels</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broken in carriages, and all the phantasies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fashion⁠—say what streams now fill those channels?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some die, some fly, some languish on the Continent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the times have hardly left them <i>one</i> tenant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some who once set their caps at cautious dukes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-923" id="noteref-923" epub:type="noteref">923</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have taken up at length with younger brothers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some heiresses have bit at sharpers’ hooks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some maids have been made wives, some merely mothers:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others have lost their fresh and fairy looks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In short, the list of alterations bothers.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s little strange in this, but something strange is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The unusual quickness of these common changes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Talk not of seventy years as age; in seven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have seen more changes, down from monarchs to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The humblest individuals under Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than might suffice a moderate century through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I knew that nought was lasting, but now even</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Change grows too changeable, without being new:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought’s permanent among the human race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except the Whigs <i>not</i> getting into place.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have seen Napoleon, who seemed quite a Jupiter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shrink to a Saturn. I have seen a Duke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(No matter which) turn politician stupider,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If that can well be, than his wooden look.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it is time that I should hoist my “blue Peter,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sail for a new theme:⁠—I have seen⁠—and shook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see it⁠—the King hissed, and then caressed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But don’t pretend to settle which was best.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have seen the Landholders without a rap⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have seen Joanna Southcote⁠—I have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The House of Commons turned to a tax-trap⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have seen that sad affair of the late Queen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen crowns worn instead of a fool’s cap⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have seen a Congress<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-924" id="noteref-924" epub:type="noteref">924</a> doing all that’s mean⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen some nations, like o’erloaded asses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kick off their burthens⁠—meaning the high classes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have seen small poets, and great prosers, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Interminable⁠—<i>not eternal</i>⁠—speakers⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen the funds at war with house and land⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have seen the country gentlemen turn squeakers⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen the people ridden o’er like sand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By slaves on horseback⁠—I have seen malt liquors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exchanged for “thin potations”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-925" id="noteref-925" epub:type="noteref">925</a> by John Bull⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have seen John half detect himself a fool.⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But <i>“carpe diem,”</i> Juan, <i>“carpe, carpe!”</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-926" id="noteref-926" epub:type="noteref">926</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To-morrow sees another race as gay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And transient, and devoured by the same harpy.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Life’s a poor player,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-927" id="noteref-927" epub:type="noteref">927</a>⁠—then “play out the play,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-928" id="noteref-928" epub:type="noteref">928</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye villains!” and above all keep a sharp eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much less on what you do than what you say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be hypocritical, be cautious, be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not what you <i>seem</i>, but always what you <i>see</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But how shall I relate in other cantos</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what befell our hero in the land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ’t is the common cry and lie to vaunt as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moral country? But I hold my hand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I disdain to write an Atalantis;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-929" id="noteref-929" epub:type="noteref">929</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ’t is as well at once to understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You are <i>not</i> a moral people, and you know it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the aid of too sincere a poet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What Juan saw and underwent shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My topic, with of course the due restriction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is required by proper courtesy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And recollect the work is only fiction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that I sing of neither mine nor me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though every scribe, in some slight turn of diction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will hint allusions never <i>meant</i>. Ne’er doubt</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>This</i>⁠—when I speak, I <i>don’t hint</i>, but <i>speak out</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whether he married with the third or fourth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Offspring of some sage husband-hunting countess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether with some virgin of more worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I mean in Fortune’s matrimonial bounties),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He took to regularly peopling Earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which your lawful, awful wedlock fount is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or whether he was taken in for damages,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For being too excursive in his homages⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-11-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Is yet within the unread events of Time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus far, go forth, thou Lay, which I will back</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against the same given quantity of rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For being as much the subject of attack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As ever yet was any work sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By those who love to say that white is black.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much the better!⁠—I may stand alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But would not change my free thoughts for a throne.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-930" id="noteref-930" epub:type="noteref">930</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
