<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</span>
				<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-3-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hail, Muse! <i>et cetera.</i>⁠—We left Juan sleeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pillowed upon a fair and happy breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And watched by eyes that never yet knew weeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And loved by a young heart, too deeply blest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel the poison through her spirit creeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or know who rested there, a foe to rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had soiled the current of her sinless years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turned her pure heart’s purest blood to tears!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, Love! what is it in this world of ours</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes it fatal to be loved? Ah why</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With cypress branches hast thou wreathed thy bowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made thy best interpreter a sigh?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those who dote on odours pluck the flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And place them on their breast⁠—but place to die⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus the frail beings we would fondly cherish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are laid within our bosoms but to perish.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In her first passion Woman loves her lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the others all she loves is Love,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which grows a habit she can ne’er get over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fits her loosely⁠—like an easy glove,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As you may find, whene’er you like to prove her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One man alone at first her heart can move;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She then prefers him in the plural number,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not finding that the additions much encumber.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know not if the fault be men’s or theirs;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But one thing’s pretty sure; a woman planted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Unless at once she plunge for life in prayers)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After a decent time must be gallanted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although, no doubt, her first of love affairs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is that to which her heart is wholly granted;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet there are some, they say, who have had <i>none</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But those who have ne’er end with only <i>one</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>‘T is melancholy, and a fearful sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of human frailty, folly, also crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Love and Marriage rarely can combine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although they both are born in the same clime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Marriage from Love, like vinegar from wine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sad, sour, sober beverage⁠—by Time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sharpened from its high celestial flavour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to a very homely household savour.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There’s something of antipathy, as ’t were,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between their present and their future state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kind of flattery that’s hardly fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is used until the truth arrives too late⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet what can people do, except despair?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same things change their names at such a rate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For instance⁠—Passion in a lover’s glorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in a husband is pronounced uxorious.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Men grow ashamed of being so very fond;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They sometimes also get a little tired</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(But that, of course, is rare), and then despond:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The same things cannot always be admired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet ’t is “so nominated in the bond,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That both are tied till one shall have expired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sad thought! to lose the spouse that was adorning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our days, and put one’s servants into mourning.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There’s doubtless something in domestic doings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which forms, in fact, true Love’s antithesis;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Romances paint at full length people’s wooings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But only give a bust of marriages;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no one cares for matrimonial cooings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There’s nothing wrong in a connubial kiss:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think you, if Laura had been Petrarch’s wife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would have written sonnets all his life?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All tragedies are finished by a death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All comedies are ended by a marriage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The future states of both are left to faith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For authors fear description might disparage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worlds to come of both, or fall beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then both worlds would punish their miscarriage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So leaving each their priest and prayer-book ready,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They say no more of Death or of the Lady.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The only two that in my recollection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have sung of Heaven and Hell, or marriage, are</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dante<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and Milton,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and of both the affection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hapless in their nuptials, for some bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of fault or temper ruined the connection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Such things, in fact, it don’t ask much to mar);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Dante’s Beatrice and Milton’s Eve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were not drawn from their spouses, you conceive.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some persons say that Dante meant Theology</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Beatrice, and not a mistress⁠—I,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although my opinion may require apology,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deem this a commentator’s phantasy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless indeed it was from his own knowledge he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Decided thus, and showed good reason why;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think that Dante’s more abstruse ecstatics</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meant to personify the Mathematics.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Haidée and Juan were not married, but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fault was theirs, not mine: it is not fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Chaste reader, then, in any way to put</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The blame on me, unless you wish they were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then if you’d have them wedded, please to shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The book which treats of this erroneous pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before the consequences grow too awful;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is dangerous to read of loves unlawful.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet they were happy⁠—happy in the illicit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indulgence of their innocent desires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But more imprudent grown with every visit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Haidée forgot the island was her Sire’s;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we have what we like ’t is hard to miss it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least in the beginning, ere one tires;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus she came often, not a moment losing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whilst her piratical papa was cruising.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Let not his mode of raising cash seem strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although he fleeced the flags of every nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For into a Prime Minister but change</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His title, and ’t is nothing but taxation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But he, more modest, took an humbler range</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Life, and in an honester vocation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pursued o’er the high seas his watery journey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merely practised as a sea-attorney.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The good old gentleman had been detained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By winds and waves, and some important captures;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, in the hope of more, at sea remained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although a squall or two had damped his raptures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By swamping one of the prizes; he had chained</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His prisoners, dividing them like chapters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In numbered lots; they all had cuffs and collars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And averaged each from ten to a hundred dollars.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some he disposed of off Cape Matapan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among his friends the Mainots; some he sold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his Tunis correspondents, save one man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tossed overboard unsaleable (being old);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest⁠—save here and there some richer one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reserved for future ransom⁠—in the hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were linked alike, as, for the common people, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had a large order from the Dey of Tripoli.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The merchandise was served in the same way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pieced out for different marts in the Levant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except some certain portions of the prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Light classic articles of female want,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>French stuffs, lace, tweezers, toothpicks, teapot, tray,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Guitars and castanets from Alicant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which selected from the spoil he gathers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Robbed for his daughter by the best of fathers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A monkey, a Dutch mastiff, a mackaw,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Two parrots, with a Persian cat and kittens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He chose from several animals he saw⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A terrier, too, which once had been a Briton’s,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who dying on the coast of Ithaca,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The peasants gave the poor dumb thing a pittance:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These to secure in this strong blowing weather,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He caged in one huge hamper altogether.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, having settled his marine affairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Despatching single cruisers here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His vessel having need of some repairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shaped his course to where his daughter fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Continued still her hospitable cares;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that part of the coast being shoal and bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rough with reefs which ran out many a mile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His port lay on the other side o’ the isle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And there he went ashore without delay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having no custom-house nor quarantine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ask him awkward questions on the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the time and place where he had been:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He left his ship to be hove down next day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With orders to the people to careen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that all hands were busy beyond measure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In getting out goods, ballast, guns, and treasure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Arriving at the summit of a hill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which overlooked the white walls of his home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He stopped.⁠—What singular emotions fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bosoms who have been induced to roam!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fluttering doubts if all be well or ill⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With love for many, and with fears for some;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All feelings which o’erleap the years long lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bring our hearts back to their starting-post.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The approach of home to husbands and to sires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">After long travelling by land or water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most naturally some small doubt inspires⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A female family’s a serious matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(None trusts the sex more, or so much admires⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But they hate flattery, so I never flatter);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wives in their husbands’ absences grow subtler,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And daughters sometimes run off with the butler.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An honest gentleman at his return</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May not have the good fortune of Ulysses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all lone matrons for their husbands mourn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or show the same dislike to suitors’ kisses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The odds are that he finds a handsome urn</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his memory⁠—and two or three young misses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Born to some friend, who holds his wife and riches⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that <i>his</i> Argus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—bites him by the breeches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If single, probably his plighted Fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has in his absence wedded some rich miser;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all the better, for the happy pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May quarrel, and, the lady growing wiser,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He may resume his amatory care</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As cavalier servente, or despise her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that his sorrow may not be a dumb one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writes odes on the Inconstancy of Woman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And oh! ye gentlemen who have already</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some chaste <i>liaison</i> of the kind⁠—I mean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An honest friendship with a married lady⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The only thing of this sort ever seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To last⁠—of all connections the most steady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the true Hymen, (the first’s but a screen)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, for all that, keep not too long away⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve known the absent wronged four times a day.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lambro, our sea-solicitor, who had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Much less experience of dry land than Ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On seeing his own chimney-smoke, felt glad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not knowing metaphysics, had no notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the true reason of his not being sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that of any other strong emotion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He loved his child, and would have wept the loss of her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But knew the cause no more than a philosopher.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He saw his white walls shining in the sun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His garden trees all shadowy and green;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard his rivulet’s light bubbling run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The distant dog-bark; and perceived between</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The umbrage of the wood, so cool and dun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moving figures, and the sparkling sheen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of arms (in the East all arm)⁠—and various dyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of coloured garbs, as bright as butterflies.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And as the spot where they appear he nears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surprised at these unwonted signs of idling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hears⁠—alas! no music of the spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But an unhallowed, earthly sound of fiddling!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A melody which made him doubt his ears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cause being past his guessing or unriddling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pipe, too, and a drum, and shortly after⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A most unoriental roar of laughter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And still more nearly to the place advancing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Descending rather quickly the declivity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the waved branches o’er the greensward glancing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Midst other indications of festivity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing a troop of his domestics dancing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Dervises, who turn as on a pivot, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perceived it was the Pyrrhic dance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> so martial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which the Levantines are very partial.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And further on a troop of Grecian girls,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The first and tallest her white kerchief waving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were strung together like a row of pearls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Linked hand in hand, and dancing; each too having</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down her white neck long floating auburn curls⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The least of which would set ten poets raving);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their leader sang⁠—and bounded to her song</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With choral step and voice the virgin throng.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And here, assembled cross-legged round their trays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Small social parties just begun to dine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pilaus and meats of all sorts met the gaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And flasks of Samian and of Chian wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sherbet cooling in the porous vase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above them their dessert grew on its vine;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The orange and pomegranate nodding o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dropped in their laps, scarce plucked, their mellow store.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A band of children, round a snow-white ram,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There wreathe his venerable horns with flowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While peaceful as if still an unweaned lamb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The patriarch of the flock all gently cowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His sober head, majestically tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or eats from out the palm, or playful lowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brow, as if in act to butt, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yielding to their small hands, draws back again.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their classical profiles, and glittering dresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their large black eyes, and soft seraphic cheeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Crimson as cleft pomegranates, their long tresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gesture which enchants, the eye that speaks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The innocence which happy childhood blesses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made quite a picture of these little Greeks;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the philosophical beholder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighed for their sakes⁠—that they should e’er grow older.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Afar, a dwarf buffoon stood telling tales</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To a sedate grey circle of old smokers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of secret treasures found in hidden vales,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of wonderful replies from Arab jokers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of charms to make good gold and cure bad ails,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of rocks bewitched that open to the knockers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of magic ladies who, by one sole act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Transformed their lords to beasts (but that’s a fact).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here was no lack of innocent diversion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the imagination or the senses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Song, dance, wine, music, stories from the Persian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All pretty pastimes in which no offence is;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Lambro saw all these things with aversion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perceiving in his absence such expenses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dreading that climax of all human ills,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The inflammation of his weekly bills.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! what is man? what perils still environ<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The happiest mortals even after dinner!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A day of gold from out an age of iron</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is all that Life allows the luckiest sinner;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleasure (whene’er she sings, at least) ’s a Siren,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That lures, to flay alive, the young beginner;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lambro’s reception at his people’s banquet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was such as fire accords to a wet blanket.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He⁠—being a man who seldom used a word</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too much, and wishing gladly to surprise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(In general he surprised men with the sword)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daughter⁠—had not sent before to advise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his arrival, so that no one stirred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long he paused to re-assure his eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In fact much more astonished than delighted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find so much good company invited.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He did not know (alas! how men will lie)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That a report (especially the Greeks)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Avouched his death (such people never die),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And put his house in mourning several weeks⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now their eyes and also lips were dry;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The bloom, too, had returned to Haidée’s cheeks:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her tears, too, being returned into their fount,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She now kept house upon her own account.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Hence all this rice, meat, dancing, wine, and fiddling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which turned the isle into a place of pleasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The servants all were getting drunk or idling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A life which made them happy beyond measure.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her father’s hospitality seemed middling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Compared with what Haidée did with his treasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T was wonderful how things went on improving,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While she had not one hour to spare from loving.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps you think, in stumbling on this feast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He flew into a passion, and in fact</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no mighty reason to be pleased;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps you prophesy some sudden act,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whip, the rack, or dungeon at the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To teach his people to be more exact,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that, proceeding at a very high rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He showed the royal <i>penchants</i> of a pirate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>You’re wrong.⁠—He was the mildest mannered man</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ever scuttled ship or cut a throat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such true breeding of a gentleman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You never could divine his real thought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No courtier could, and scarcely woman can</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gird more deceit within a petticoat;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pity he loved adventurous life’s variety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was so great a loss to good society.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Advancing to the nearest dinner tray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tapping the shoulder of the nighest guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a peculiar smile, which, by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Boded no good, whatever it expressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He asked the meaning of this holiday;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The vinous Greek to whom he had addressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His question, much too merry to divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The questioner, filled up a glass of wine,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And without turning his facetious head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over his shoulder, with a Bacchant air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presented the o’erflowing cup, and said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Talking’s dry work, I have no time to spare.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second hiccuped, “Our old Master’s dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You’d better ask our Mistress who’s his heir.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Our Mistress!” quoth a third: “Our Mistress!⁠—pooh!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You mean our Master⁠—not the old, but new.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These rascals, being new comers, knew not whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They thus addressed⁠—and Lambro’s visage fell⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And o’er his eye a momentary gloom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passed, but he strove quite courteously to quell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The expression, and endeavouring to resume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His smile, requested one of them to tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The name and quality of his new patron,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seemed to have turned Haidée into a matron.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I know not,” quoth the fellow, “who or what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He is, nor whence he came⁠—and little care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this I know, that this roast capon’s fat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that good wine ne’er washed down better fare;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if you are not satisfied with that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Direct your questions to my neighbour there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’ll answer all for better or for worse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For none likes more to hear himself converse.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I said that Lambro was a man of patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And certainly he showed the best of breeding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which scarce even France, the Paragon of nations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">E’er saw her most polite of sons exceeding;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He bore these sneers against his near relations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own anxiety, his heart, too, bleeding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The insults, too, of every servile glutton,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who all the time was eating up his mutton.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now in a person used to much command⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bid men come, and go, and come again⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see his orders done, too, out of hand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether the word was death, or but the chain⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may seem strange to find his manners bland;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet such things are, which I cannot explain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though, doubtless, he who can command himself</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is good to govern⁠—almost as a Guelf.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not that he was not sometimes rash or so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But never in his real and serious mood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then calm, concentrated, and still, and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He lay coiled like the Boa in the wood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With him it never was a word and blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His angry word once o’er, he shed no blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in his silence there was much to rue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And his <i>one</i> blow left little work for <i>two</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He asked no further questions, and proceeded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On to the house, but by a private way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the few who met him hardly heeded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So little they expected him that day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If love paternal in his bosom pleaded</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Haidée’s sake, is more than I can say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But certainly to one deemed dead returning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This revel seemed a curious mode of mourning.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If all the dead could now return to life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Which God forbid!) or some, or a great many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For instance, if a husband or his wife<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Nuptial examples are as good as any),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt whate’er might be their former strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The present weather would be much more rainy⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tears shed into the grave of the connection</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would share most probably its resurrection.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He entered in the house no more his home,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing to human feelings the most trying,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And harder for the heart to overcome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps, than even the mental pangs of dying;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find our hearthstone turned into a tomb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round its once warm precincts palely lying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ashes of our hopes, is a deep grief,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beyond a <i>single gentleman’s</i> belief.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He entered in the house⁠—his home no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For without hearts there is no home;⁠—and felt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The solitude of passing his own door</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without a welcome: <i>there</i> he long had dwelt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There his few peaceful days Time had swept o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There his worn bosom and keen eye would melt</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Over the innocence of that sweet child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His only shrine of feelings undefiled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was a man of a strange temperament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mild demeanour though of savage mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moderate in all his habits, and content</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With temperance in pleasure, as in food,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quick to perceive, and strong to bear, and meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For something better, if not wholly good;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Country’s wrongs and his despair to save her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had stung him from a slave to an enslaver.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The love of power, and rapid gain of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hardness by long habitude produced,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dangerous life in which he had grown old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mercy he had granted oft abused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sights he was accustomed to behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wild seas, and wild men with whom he cruised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had cost his enemies a long repentance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And made him a good friend, but bad acquaintance.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But something of the spirit of old Greece</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flashed o’er his soul a few heroic rays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as lit onward to the Golden Fleece</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His predecessors in the Colchian days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is true he had no ardent love for peace⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alas! his country showed no path to praise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hate to the world and war with every nation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He waged, in vengeance of her degradation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Still o’er his mind the influence of the clime</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shed its Ionian elegance, which showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its power unconsciously full many a time⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A taste seen in the choice of his abode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A love of music and of scenes sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pleasure in the gentle stream that flowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Past him in crystal, and a joy in flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bedewed his spirit in his calmer hours.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But whatsoe’er he had of love reposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On that belovéd daughter; she had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only thing which kept his heart unclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst the savage deeds he had done and seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lonely pure affection unopposed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There wanted but the loss of this to wean</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feelings from all milk of human kindness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And turn him like the Cyclops mad with blindness.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The cubless tigress in her jungle raging</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is dreadful to the shepherd and the flock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ocean when its yeasty war is waging</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is awful to the vessel near the rock;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But violent things will sooner bear assuaging,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their fury being spent by its own shock,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the stern, single, deep, and wordless ire<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a strong human heart, and in a Sire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is a hard although a common case</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To find our children running restive⁠—they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In whom our brightest days we would retrace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our little selves re-formed in finer clay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as old age is creeping on apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clouds come o’er the sunset of our day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They kindly leave us, though not quite alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in good company⁠—the gout or stone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet a fine family is a fine thing</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Provided they don’t come in after dinner);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T is beautiful to see a matron bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her children up (if nursing them don’t thin her);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like cherubs round an altar-piece they cling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the fire-side (a sight to touch a sinner).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lady with her daughters or her nieces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shine like a guinea and seven-shilling pieces.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Old Lambro passed unseen a private gate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stood within his hall at eventide;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime the lady and her lover sate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At wassail in their beauty and their pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An ivory inlaid table spread with state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before them, and fair slaves on every side;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gems, gold, and silver, formed the service mostly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mother of pearl and coral the less costly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The dinner made about a hundred dishes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lamb and pistachio nuts⁠—in short, all meats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And saffron soups, and sweetbreads; and the fishes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were of the finest that e’er flounced in nets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dressed to a Sybarite’s most pampered wishes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The beverage was various sherbets</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of raisin, orange, and pomegranate juice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Squeezed through the rind, which makes it best for use.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These were ranged round, each in its crystal ewer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fruits, and date-bread loaves closed the repast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mocha’s berry, from Arabia pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In small fine China cups, came in at last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gold cups of filigree, made to secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hand from burning, underneath them placed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cloves, cinnamon, and saffron too were boiled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up with the coffee, which (I think) they spoiled.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The hangings of the room were tapestry, made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of velvet panels, each of different hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thick with damask flowers of silk inlaid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And round them ran a yellow border too;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The upper border, richly wrought, displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Embroidered delicately o’er with blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Soft Persian sentences, in lilac letters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From poets, or the moralists their betters.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These Oriental writings on the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite common in those countries, are a kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of monitors adapted to recall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like skulls at Memphian banquets, to the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The words which shook Belshazzar in his hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And took his kingdom from him: You will find,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though sages may pour out their wisdom’s treasure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is no sterner moralist than Pleasure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A Beauty at the season’s close grown hectic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Genius who has drunk himself to death,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Rake turned methodistic, or Eclectic⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For that’s the name they like to pray beneath)⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But most, an Alderman struck apoplectic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are things that really take away the breath⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And show that late hours, wine, and love are able</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do not much less damage than the table.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Haidée and Juan carpeted their feet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On crimson satin, bordered with pale blue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their sofa occupied three parts complete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the apartment⁠—and appeared quite new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The velvet cushions (for a throne more meet)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were scarlet, from whose glowing centre grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sun embossed in gold, whose rays of tissue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meridian-like, were seen all light to issue.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Crystal and marble, plate and porcelain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had done their work of splendour; Indian mats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Persian carpets, which the heart bled to stain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Over the floors were spread; gazelles and cats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dwarfs and blacks, and such like things, that gain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their bread as ministers and favourites (that’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say, by degradation) mingled there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As plentiful as in a court, or fair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was no want of lofty mirrors, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tables, most of ebony inlaid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With mother of pearl or ivory, stood at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or were of tortoise-shell or rare woods made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fretted with gold or silver:⁠—by command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The greater part of these were ready spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With viands and sherbets in ice⁠—and wine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept for all comers at all hours to dine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of all the dresses I select Haidée’s:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She wore two jelicks⁠—one was of pale yellow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of azure, pink, and white was her chemise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Neath which her breast heaved like a little billow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With buttons formed of pearls as large as peas,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All gold and crimson shone her jelick’s fellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the striped white gauze baracan that bound her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like fleecy clouds about the moon, flowed round her.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One large gold bracelet clasped each lovely arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lockless⁠—so pliable from the pure gold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the hand stretched and shut it without harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The limb which it adorned its only mould;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So beautiful⁠—its very shape would charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And clinging, as if loath to lose its hold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The purest ore enclosed the whitest skin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That e’er by precious metal was held in.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Around, as Princess of her father’s land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A like gold bar above her instep rolled<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Announced her rank; twelve rings were on her hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hair was starred with gems; her veil’s fine fold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Below her breast was fastened with a band</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lavish pearls, whose worth could scarce be told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her orange silk full Turkish trousers furled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the prettiest ankle in the world.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her hair’s long auburn waves down to her heel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flowed like an Alpine torrent which the sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dyes with his morning light⁠—and would conceal</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her person<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> if allowed at large to run,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still they seemed resentfully to feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The silken fillet’s curb, and sought to shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their bonds whene’er some Zephyr caught began</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To offer his young pinion as her fan.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Round her she made an atmosphere of life,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very air seemed lighter from her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were so soft and beautiful, and rife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all we can imagine of the skies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pure as Psyche ere she grew a wife⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Too pure even for the purest human ties;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her overpowering presence made you feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would not be idolatry to kneel.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her eyelashes, though dark as night, were tinged</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(It is the country’s custom, but in vain),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For those large black eyes were so blackly fringed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The glossy rebels mocked the jetty stain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in their native beauty stood avenged:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her nails were touched with henna; but, again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The power of Art was turned to nothing, for</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They could not look more rosy than before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The henna should be deeply dyed to make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The skin relieved appear more fairly fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had no need of this, day ne’er will break</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On mountain tops more heavenly white than her:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eye might doubt if it were well awake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was so like a vision; I might err,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Shakespeare also says, ’t is very silly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“To gild refinéd gold, or paint the lily.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan had on a shawl of black and gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But a white baracan, and so transparent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sparkling gems beneath you might behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like small stars through the milky way apparent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His turban, furled in many a graceful fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An emerald aigrette, with Haidée’s hair in’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surmounted as its clasp⁠—a glowing crescent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose rays shone ever trembling, but incessant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now they were diverted by their suite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dwarfs, dancing girls, black eunuchs, and a poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which made their new establishment complete;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last was of great fame, and liked to show it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His verses rarely wanted their due feet⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for his theme⁠—he seldom sung below it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He being paid to satirise or flatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the Psalm says, “inditing a good matter.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He praised the present, and abused the past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reversing the good custom of old days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An Eastern anti-jacobin at last</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He turned, preferring pudding to <i>no</i> praise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some few years his lot had been o’ercast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By his seeming independent in his lays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now he sung the Sultan and the Pacha⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With truth like Southey, and with verse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> like Crashaw.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was a man who had seen many changes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And always changed as true as any needle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Polar Star being one which rather ranges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And not the fixed⁠—he knew the way to wheedle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So vile he ’scaped the doom which oft avenges;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being fluent (save indeed when fee’d ill),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He lied with such a fervour of intention⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no doubt he earned his laureate pension.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But <i>he</i> had genius⁠—when a turncoat has it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The <i>Vates irritabilis</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> takes care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That without notice few full moons shall pass it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even good men like to make the public stare:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to my subject⁠—let me see⁠—what was it?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh!⁠—the third canto⁠—and the pretty pair⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their loves, and feasts, and house, and dress, and mode</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of living in their insular abode.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their poet, a sad trimmer, but, no less,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In company a very pleasant fellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had been the favourite of full many a mess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of men, and made them speeches when half mellow;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though his meaning they could rarely guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet still they deigned to hiccup or to bellow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glorious meed of popular applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the first ne’er knows the second cause.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now being lifted into high society,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And having picked up several odds and ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of free thoughts in his travels for variety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He deemed, being in a lone isle, among friends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That, without any danger of a riot, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might for long lying make himself amends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, singing as he sung in his warm youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Agree to a short armistice with Truth.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had travelled ’mongst the Arabs, Turks, and Franks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knew the self-loves of the different nations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And having lived with people of all ranks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had something ready upon most occasions⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which got him a few presents and some thanks.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He varied with some skill his adulations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To “do at Rome as Romans do,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> a piece</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of conduct was which <i>he</i> observed in Greece.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus, usually, when <i>he</i> was asked to sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gave the different nations something national;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>‘T was all the same to him⁠—“God save the King,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or “Ça ira,” according to the fashion all:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His Muse made increment of anything,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the high lyric down to the low rational;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Pindar sang horse-races, what should hinder</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself from being as pliable as Pindar?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In France, for instance, he would write a chanson;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In England a six canto quarto tale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Spain he’d make a ballad or romance on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The last war⁠—much the same in Portugal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Germany, the Pegasus he’d prance on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would be old Goethe’s⁠—(see what says De Staël);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Italy he’d ape the “Trecentisti;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Greece, he’d sing some sort of hymn like this t’ ye:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:hymn">
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">1</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>The Isles of Greece, the Isles of Greece!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Where burning Sappho loved and sung,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Where grew the arts of War and Peace,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Eternal summer gilds them yet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But all, except their Sun, is set.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>The Scian and the Teian muse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The Hero’s harp, the Lover’s lute,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Have found the fame your shores refuse:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Their place of birth alone is mute</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To sounds which echo further west</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Than your Sires’ “Islands of the Blest.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>The mountains look on Marathon⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And Marathon looks on the sea;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And musing there an hour alone,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">I dreamed that Greece might still be free;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For standing on the Persians’ grave,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I could not deem myself a slave.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">4<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>A King sate on the rocky brow</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Which looks o’er sea-born Salamis;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And ships, by thousands, lay below,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And men in nations;⁠—all were his!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He counted them at break of day⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, when the Sun set, where were they?</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">5</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>And where are they? and where art thou,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">My Country? On thy voiceless shore</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The heroic lay is tuneless now⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The heroic bosom beats no more!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>And must thy Lyre, so long divine,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Degenerate into hands like mine?</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">6</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>‘T is something, in the dearth of Fame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Though linked among a fettered race,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To feel at least a patriot’s shame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Even as I sing, suffuse my face;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For what is left the poet here?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For Greeks a blush⁠—for Greece a tear.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">7</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Must <i>we</i> but weep o’er days more blest?</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Must <i>we</i> but blush?⁠—Our fathers bled.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Earth! render back from out thy breast</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">A remnant of our Spartan dead!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of the three hundred grant but three,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To make a new Thermopylæ!</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">8</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>What, silent still? and silent all?</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Ah! no;⁠—the voices of the dead</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sound like a distant torrent’s fall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And answer, “Let one living head,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But one arise⁠—we come, we come!”</span>
							<br/>
							<span>‘T is but the living who are dumb.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">9</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>In vain⁠—in vain: strike other chords;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Fill high the cup with Samian wine!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Leave battles to the Turkish hordes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And shed the blood of Scio’s vine!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Hark! rising to the ignoble call⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>How answers each bold Bacchanal!</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">10</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>You have the Pyrrhic dance as yet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Where is the Pyrrhic phalanx gone?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of two such lessons, why forget</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The nobler and the manlier one?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You have the letters Cadmus gave⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Think ye he meant them for a slave?</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">11</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">We will not think of themes like these!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It made Anacreon’s song divine:</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">He served⁠—but served Polycrates⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>A Tyrant; but our masters then</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Were still, at least, our countrymen.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">12</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>The Tyrant of the Chersonese</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Was Freedom’s best and bravest friend;</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i>That</i> tyrant was Miltiades!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Oh! that the present hour would lend</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Another despot of the kind!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Such chains as his were sure to bind.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">13</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">On Suli’s rock, and Parga’s shore,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Exists the remnant of a line</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Such as the Doric mothers bore;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And there, perhaps, some seed is sown,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Heracleidan blood might own.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">14</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Trust not for freedom to the Franks⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">They have a king who buys and sells;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In native swords, and native ranks,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The only hope of courage dwells;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But Turkish force, and Latin fraud,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Would break your shield, however broad.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">15</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Our virgins dance beneath the shade⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I see their glorious black eyes shine;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">But gazing on each glowing maid,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My own the burning tear-drop laves,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To think such breasts must suckle slaves.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">16</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Place me on Sunium’s marbled steep,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Where nothing, save the waves and I,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">There, swan-like, let me sing and die:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A land of slaves shall ne’er be mine⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dash down yon cup of Samian wine!</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus sung, or would, or could, or should have sung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The modern Greek, in tolerable verse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If not like Orpheus quite, when Greece was young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet in these times he might have done much worse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His strain displayed some feeling⁠—right or wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feeling,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> in a poet, is the source</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of others’ feeling; but they are such liars,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take all colours⁠—like the hands of dyers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But words are things,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and a small drop of ink,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Falling like dew, upon a thought, produces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That which makes thousands, perhaps millions, think;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘T is strange, the shortest letter which man uses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Instead of speech, may form a lasting link</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ages; to what straits old Time reduces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frail man, when paper⁠—even a rag like this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Survives himself, his tomb, and all that’s his!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when his bones are dust, his grave a blank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His station, generation, even his nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Become a thing, or nothing, save to rank</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In chronological commemoration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some dull <abbr>MS.</abbr> Oblivion long has sank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or graven stone found in a barrack’s station</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In digging the foundation of a closet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>May turn his name up, as a rare deposit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Glory long has made the sages smile;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘T is something, nothing, words, illusion, wind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depending more upon the historian’s style</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than on the name a person leaves behind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Troy owes to Homer what whist owes to Hoyle:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The present century was growing blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the great Marlborough’s skill in giving knocks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until his late Life by Archdeacon Coxe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Milton’s the Prince of poets⁠—so we say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little heavy, but no less divine:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An independent being in his day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Learned, pious, temperate in love and wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, his life falling into Johnson’s way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We’re told this great High Priest of all the Nine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was whipped at college⁠—a harsh sire⁠—odd spouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Milton left his house.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All these are, <i>certes</i>, entertaining facts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Shakespeare’s stealing deer, Lord Bacon’s bribes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Titus’ youth, and Cæsar’s earliest acts;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Burns (whom Doctor Currie well describes);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Cromwell’s pranks;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—but although Truth exacts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These amiable descriptions from the scribes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As most essential to their Hero’s story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They do not much contribute to his glory.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All are not moralists, like Southey, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He prated to the world of “Pantisocracy;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Wordsworth unexcised,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> unhired, who then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seasoned his pedlar poems with Democracy;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Coleridge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> long before his flighty pen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let to the Morning Post its aristocracy;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he and Southey, following the same path,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Espoused two partners (milliners of Bath).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such names at present cut a convict figure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The very Botany Bay in moral geography;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their loyal treason, renegado rigour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are good manure for their more bare biography;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wordsworth’s last quarto, by the way, is bigger</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than any since the birthday of typography;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A drowsy, frowzy poem, called the “Excursion,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writ in a manner which is my aversion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He there builds up a formidable dyke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between his own and others’ intellect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Wordsworth’s poem, and his followers, like</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Joanna Southcote’s Shiloh<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and her sect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are things which in this century don’t strike</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The public mind⁠—so few are the elect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the new births of both their stale Virginities</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have proved but Dropsies, taken for Divinities.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But let me to my story: I must own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I have any fault, it is digression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaving my people to proceed alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While I soliloquize beyond expression:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these are my addresses from the throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which put off business to the ensuing session:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forgetting each omission is a loss to</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The world, not quite so great as Ariosto.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know that what our neighbours call <i>“longueurs,”</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(We’ve not so good a <i>word</i>, but have the <i>thing</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that complete perfection which insures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An epic from Bob Southey every spring⁠—)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Form not the true temptation which allures</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The reader; but ’t would not be hard to bring</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some fine examples of the <i>Epopée</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove its grand ingredient is <i>Ennui</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We learn from Horace, “Homer sometimes sleeps;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We feel without him⁠—Wordsworth sometimes wakes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show with what complacency he creeps,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his dear “<i>Waggoners</i>,” around his lakes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He wishes for “a boat” to sail the deeps⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Ocean?⁠—No, of air; and then he makes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another outcry for “a little boat,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And drivels seas to set it well afloat.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If he must fain sweep o’er the ethereal plain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pegasus runs restive in his “Waggon,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could he not beg the loan of Charles’s Wain?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or pray Medea for a single dragon?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if, too classic for his vulgar brain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He feared his neck to venture such a nag on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he must needs mount nearer to the moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not the blockhead ask for a balloon?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Pedlars,” and “Boats,” and “Waggons!” Oh! ye shades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Pope and Dryden, are we come to this?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That trash of such sort not alone evades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contempt, but from the bathos’ vast abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Floats scumlike uppermost, and these Jack Cades</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sense and song above your graves may hiss⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The “little boatman” and his <i>Peter Bell</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can sneer at him who drew “Achitophel!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>T’ our tale.⁠—The feast was over, the slaves gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dwarfs and dancing girls had all retired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Arab lore and Poet’s song were done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every sound of revelry expired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lady and her lover, left alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The rosy flood of Twilight’s sky admired;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ave Maria! o’er the earth and sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That heavenliest hour of Heaven is worthiest thee!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ave Maria! blesséd be the hour!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The time, the clime, the spot, where I so oft</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have felt that moment in its fullest power</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sink o’er the earth⁠—so beautiful and soft⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While swung the deep bell in the distant tower,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the faint dying day-hymn stole aloft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a breath crept through the rosy air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet the forest leaves seemed stirred with prayer.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ave Maria! ’t is the hour of prayer!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ave Maria! ’t is the hour of Love!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ave Maria! may our spirits dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Look up to thine and to thy Son’s above!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ave Maria! oh that face so fair!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those downcast eyes beneath the Almighty Dove⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though ’t is but a pictured image?⁠—strike⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That painting is no idol⁠—‘t is too like.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some kinder casuists are pleased to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In nameless print<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—that I have no devotion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But set those persons down with me to pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you shall see who has the properest notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of getting into Heaven the shortest way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My altars are the mountains and the Ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Earth⁠—air⁠—stars,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—all that springs from the great Whole,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who hath produced, and will receive the Soul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sweet Hour of Twilight!⁠—in the solitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the pine forest, and the silent shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which bounds Ravenna’s immemorial wood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rooted where once the Adrian wave flowed o’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To where the last Cæsarean fortress stood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Evergreen forest! which Boccaccio’s lore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Dryden’s lay made haunted ground to me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How have I loved the twilight hour and thee!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The shrill cicalas, people of the pine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Making their summer lives one ceaseless song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were the sole echoes, save my steed’s and mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Vesper bell’s that rose the boughs along;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spectre huntsman of Onesti’s line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His hell-dogs, and their chase, and the fair throng</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which learned from this example not to fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From a true lover⁠—shadowed my mind’s eye.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, Hesperus! thou bringest all good things⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Home to the weary, to the hungry cheer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the young bird the parent’s brooding wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The welcome stall to the o’erlaboured steer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er of peace about our hearthstone clings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er our household gods protect of dear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are gathered round us by thy look of rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou bring’st the child, too, to the mother’s breast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Soft Hour! which wakes the wish and melts the heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those who sail the seas, on the first day</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they from their sweet friends are torn apart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fills with love the pilgrim on his way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the far bell of Vesper makes him start,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seeming to weep the dying day’s decay;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is this a fancy which our reason scorns?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah! surely Nothing dies but Something mourns!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Nero perished by the justest doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which ever the Destroyer yet destroyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amidst the roar of liberated Rome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of nations freed, and the world overjoyed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some hands unseen strewed flowers upon his tomb:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps the weakness of a heart not void</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feeling for some kindness done, when Power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had left the wretch an uncorrupted hour.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I’m digressing; what on earth has Nero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or any such like sovereign buffoons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To do with the transactions of my hero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More than such madmen’s fellow man⁠—the moon’s?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sure my invention must be down at zero,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I grown one of many “Wooden Spoons”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of verse, (the name with which we Cantabs please</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To dub the last of honours in degrees).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-3-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I feel this tediousness will never do⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">T’ is being <i>too</i> epic, and I must cut down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(In copying) this long canto into two;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They’ll never find it out, unless I own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fact, excepting some experienced few;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then as an improvement ’t will be shown:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll prove that such the opinion of the critic is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From Aristotle <i>passim</i>.⁠—See <span title="POIÊTIKÊS">ΠΟΙΗΤΙΚΗΣ</span>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
