<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-13" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</span>
				<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-13-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I now mean to be serious;—it is time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since Laughter now-a-days is deemed too serious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jest at Vice by Virtue's called a crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And critically held as deleterious:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, the sad's a source of the sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although, when long, a little apt to weary us;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore shall my lay soar high and solemn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As an old temple dwindled to a column.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Lady Adeline Amundeville</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">('T is an old Norman name, and to be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In pedigrees, by those who wander still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the last fields of that Gothic ground)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was high-born, wealthy by her father's will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And beauteous, even where beauties most abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Britain—which, of course, true patriots find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The goodliest soil of Body and of Mind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I'll not gainsay them; it is not my cue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I'll leave them to their taste, no doubt the best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An eye's an eye, and whether black or blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is no great matter, so 't is in request;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T is nonsense to dispute about a hue—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The kindest may be taken as a test.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair sex should be always fair; and no man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till thirty, should perceive there's a plain woman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And after that serene and somewhat dull</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Epoch, that awkward corner turned for days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More quiet, when our moon's no more at full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We may presume to criticise or praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because Indifference begins to lull</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our passions, and we walk in Wisdom's ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also because the figure and the face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hint, that 't is time to give the younger place.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know that some would fain postpone this era,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reluctant as all placemen to resign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their post; but theirs is merely a chimera,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For they have passed Life's equinoctial line:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then they have their claret and Madeira,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To irrigate the dryness of decline;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And County meetings, and the Parliament,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And debt—and what not, for their solace sent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And is there not Religion, and Reform,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peace, War, the taxes, and what's called the "Nation"?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The struggle to be pilots in a storm?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The landed and the monied speculation?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The joys of mutual hate to keep them warm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Instead of Love, that mere hallucination?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Hatred is by far the longest pleasure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men love in haste, but they detest at leisure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Rough Johnson, the great moralist, professed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Right honestly, "he liked an honest hater!"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only truth that yet has been confessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within these latest thousand years or later.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps the fine old fellow spoke in jest:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For my part, I am but a mere spectator,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gaze where'er the palace or the hovel is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much in the mode of Goethe's Mephistopheles;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But neither love nor hate in much excess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though 't was not once so. If I sneer sometimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is because I cannot well do less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now and then it also suits my rhymes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I should be very willing to redress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men's wrongs, and rather check than punish crimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not Cervantes, in that too true tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Quixote, shown how all such efforts fail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of all tales 't is the saddest—and more sad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it makes us smile: his hero's right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still pursues the right;—to curb the bad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His only object, and 'gainst odds to fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His guerdon: 't is his virtue makes him mad!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But his adventures form a sorry sight;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sorrier still is the great moral taught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By that real Epic unto all who have thought.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Redressing injury, revenging wrong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To aid the damsel and destroy the caitiff;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opposing singly the united strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From foreign yoke to free the helpless native:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! must noblest views, like an old song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be for mere Fancy's sport a theme creative,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A jest, a riddle, Fame through thin and thick sought!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Socrates himself but Wisdom's Quixote?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Cervantes smiled Spain's chivalry away;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A single laugh demolished the right arm</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his own country;—seldom since that day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has Spain had heroes. While Romance could charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World gave ground before her bright array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore have his volumes done such harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That all their glory, as a composition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was dearly purchased by his land's perdition.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I'm "at my old lunes"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>—digression, and forget</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lady Adeline Amundeville;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair most fatal Juan ever met,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although she was not evil nor meant ill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Destiny and Passion spread the net</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Fate is a good excuse for our own will),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And caught them;—what do they <i>not</i> catch, methinks?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I'm not Oedipus, and Life's a Sphinx.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I tell the tale as it is told, nor dare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To venture a solution: "<i>Davus sum!</i>"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now I will proceed upon the pair.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sweet Adeline, amidst the gay World's hum,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was the Queen-Bee, the glass of all that's fair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose charms made all men speak, and women dumb.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last's a miracle, and such was reckoned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And since that time there has not been a second.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Chaste was she, to Detraction's desperation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wedded unto one she had loved well—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A man known in the councils of the Nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cool, and quite English, imperturbable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though apt to act with fire upon occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Proud of himself and her: the World could tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nought against either, and both seemed secure—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She in her virtue, he in his hauteur.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It chanced some diplomatical relations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arising out of business, often brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Himself and Juan in their mutual stations</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into close contact. Though reserved, nor caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By specious seeming, Juan's youth, and patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And talent, on his haughty spirit wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And formed a basis of esteem, which ends</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In making men what Courtesy calls friends.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus Lord Henry, who was cautious as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reserve and Pride could make him, and full slow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In judging men—when once his judgment was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Determined, right or wrong, on friend or foe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had all the pertinacity Pride has,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which knows no ebb to its imperious flow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And loves or hates, disdaining to be guided,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because its own good pleasure hath decided.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His friendships, therefore, and no less aversions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though oft well founded, which confirmed but more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His prepossessions, like the laws of Persians</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Medes, would ne'er revoke what went before.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His feelings had not those strange fits, like tertians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of common likings, which make some deplore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What they should laugh at—the mere ague still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of men's regard, the fever or the chill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"'T is not in mortals to command success:"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But <i>do you more</i>, Sempronius—<i>don't</i> deserve it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take my word, you won't have any less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be wary, watch the time, and always serve it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Give gently way, when there's too great a press;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for your conscience, only learn to nerve it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For, like a racer, or a boxer training,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T will make, if proved, vast efforts without paining.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord Henry also liked to be superior,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As most men do, the little or the great;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very lowest find out an inferior,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least they think so, to exert their state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon: for there are very few things wearier</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than solitary Pride's oppressive weight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mortals generously would divide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By bidding others carry while they ride.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In birth, in rank, in fortune likewise equal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O'er Juan he could no distinction claim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In years he had the advantage of Time's sequel;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, as he thought, in country much the same—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because bold Britons have a tongue and free quill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which all modern nations vainly aim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the Lord Henry was a great debater,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that few Members kept the House up later.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These were advantages: and then he thought—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It was his foible, but by no means sinister—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That few or none more than himself had caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Court mysteries, having been himself a minister:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He liked to teach that which he had been taught,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And greatly shone whenever there had been a stir;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And reconciled all qualities which grace man,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always a patriot—and, sometimes, a placeman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He liked the gentle Spaniard for his gravity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He almost honoured him for his docility;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because, though young, he acquiesced with suavity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or contradicted but with proud humility.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He knew the World, and would not see depravity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In faults which sometimes show the soil's fertility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that the weeds o'erlive not the first crop—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then they are very difficult to stop.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then he talked with him about Madrid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Constantinople, and such distant places;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where people always did as they were bid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or did what they should not with foreign graces.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of coursers also spake they: Henry rid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well, like most Englishmen, and loved the races;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Juan, like a true-born Andalusian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could back<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> a horse, as Despots ride a Russian.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus acquaintance grew, at noble routs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And diplomatic dinners, or at other—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Juan stood well both with Ins and Outs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As in freemasonry a higher brother.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon his talent Henry had no doubts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His manner showed him sprung from a high mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all men like to show their hospitality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To him whose breeding matches with his quality.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At Blank-Blank Square;—for we will break no squares<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By naming streets: since men are so censorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And apt to sow an author's wheat with tares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reaping allusions private and inglorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where none were dreamt of, unto Love's affairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which were, or are, or are to be notorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That therefore do I previously declare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord Henry's mansion was in Blank-Blank Square.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Also there bin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> another pious reason</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For making squares and streets anonymous;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is, that there is scarce a single season</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doth not shake some very splendid house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With some slight heart-quake of domestic treason—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A topic Scandal doth delight to rouse:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such I might stumble over unawares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless I knew the very chastest squares.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>'T is true, I might have chosen Piccadilly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A place where peccadillos are unknown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I have motives, whether wise or silly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For letting that pure sanctuary alone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore I name not square, street, place, until I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Find one where nothing naughty can be shown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vestal shrine of Innocence of Heart:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such are—but I have lost the London Chart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At Henry's mansion then, in Blank-Blank Square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Juan a <i>recherché</i>, welcome guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many other noble scions were;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some who had but Talent for their crest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Wealth, which is a passport everywhere;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or even mere Fashion, which indeed's the best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Recommendation; and to be well dressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will very often supersede the rest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And since "there's safety in a multitude</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of counsellors," as Solomon has said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or some one for him, in some sage, grave mood;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indeed we see the daily proof displayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Senates, at the Bar, in wordy feud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where'er collective wisdom can parade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is the only cause that we can guess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Britain's present wealth and happiness;—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But as "there's safety" grafted in the number</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Of counsellors," for men,—thus for the sex</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A large acquaintance lets not Virtue slumber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or should it shake, the choice will more perplex—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Variety itself will more encumber.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Midst many rocks we guard more against wrecks—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus with women: howsoe'er it shocks some's</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Self-love, there's safety in a crowd of coxcombs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Adeline had not the least occasion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For such a shield, which leaves but little merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Virtue proper, or good education.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her chief resource was in her own high spirit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which judged Mankind at their due estimation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for coquetry, she disdained to wear it—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Secure of admiration: its impression</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was faint—as of an every-day possession.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To all she was polite without parade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To some she showed attention of that kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which flatters, but is flattery conveyed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such a sort as cannot leave behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A trace unworthy either wife or maid;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A gentle, genial courtesy of mind,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who were, or passed for meritorious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just to console sad Glory for being glorious;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Which is in all respects, save now and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dull and desolate appendage. Gaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the shades of those distinguished men</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who were or are the puppet-shows of praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The praise of persecution. Gaze again</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On the most favoured; and amidst the blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sunset halos o'er the laurel-browed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What can ye recognise?—a gilded cloud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There also was of course in Adeline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That calm patrician polish in the address,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ne'er can pass the equinoctial line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of anything which Nature would express;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as a Mandarin finds nothing fine,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least his manner suffers not to guess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That anything he views can greatly please:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps we have borrowed this from the Chinese—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps from Horace: his <i>"Nil admirari"</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was what he called the "Art of Happiness"—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An art on which the artists greatly vary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And have not yet attained to much success.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>However, 't is expedient to be wary:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indifference, certes, don't produce distress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rash Enthusiasm in good society</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were nothing but a moral inebriety.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Adeline was not indifferent: for</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(<i>Now</i> for a common-place!) beneath the snow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a Volcano holds the lava more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within—<i>et cætera</i>. Shall I go on?—No!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I hate to hunt down a tired metaphor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So let the often-used Volcano go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor thing! How frequently, by me and others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It hath been stirred up till its smoke quite smothers!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I'll have another figure in a trice:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What say you to a bottle of champagne?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Frozen into a very vinous ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which leaves few drops of that immortal rain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet in the very centre, past all price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About a liquid glassful will remain;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this is stronger than the strongest grape</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could e'er express in its expanded shape:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>'T is the whole spirit brought to a quintessence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus the chilliest aspects may concentre</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hidden nectar under a cold presence.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And such are many—though I only meant her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From whom I now deduce these moral lessons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which the Muse has always sought to enter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And your cold people are beyond all price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When once you've broken their confounded ice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But after all they are a North-West Passage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unto the glowing India of the soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as the good ships sent upon that message</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have not exactly ascertained the Pole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though Parry's efforts look a lucky presage),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus gentlemen may run upon a shoal;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For if the Pole's not open, but all frost</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(A chance still), 't is a voyage or vessel lost.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And young beginners may as well commence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With quiet cruising o'er the ocean, Woman;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While those who are not beginners should have sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Enough to make for port, ere Time shall summon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his grey signal-flag; and the past tense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dreary <i>Fuimus</i> of all things human,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must be declined, while Life's thin thread's spun out</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the gaping heir and gnawing gout.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Heaven must be diverted; its diversion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is sometimes truculent—but never mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World upon the whole is worth the assertion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(If but for comfort) that all things are kind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that same devilish doctrine of the Persian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the "Two Principles," but leaves behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many doubts as any other doctrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has ever puzzled Faith withal, or yoked her in.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The English winter—ending in July,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To recommence in August—now was done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T is the postilion's paradise: wheels fly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On roads, East, South, North, West, there is a run.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for post-horses who finds sympathy?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Man's pity's for himself, or for his son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Always premising that said son at college</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has not contracted much more debt than knowledge.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The London winter's ended in July—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes a little later. I don't err</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this: whatever other blunders lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon my shoulders, here I must aver</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Muse a glass of <i>Weatherology</i>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Parliament is our barometer:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let Radicals its other acts attack,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its sessions form our only almanack.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When its quicksilver's down at zero,—lo!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coach, chariot, luggage, baggage, equipage!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wheels whirl from Carlton Palace to Soho,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And happiest they who horses can engage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The turnpikes glow with dust; and Rotten Row</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sleeps from the chivalry of this bright age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tradesmen, with long bills and longer faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sigh—as the postboys fasten on the traces.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They and their bills, "Arcadians both,"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> are left</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the Greek Kalends of another session.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! to them of ready cash bereft,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What hope remains? Of <i>hope</i> the full possession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or generous draft, conceded as a gift,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At a long date—till they can get a fresh one—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hawked about at a discount, small or large;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also the solace of an overcharge.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But these are trifles. Downward flies my Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nodding beside my Lady in his carriage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Away! away! "Fresh horses!" are the word,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And changed as quickly as hearts after marriage;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The obsequious landlord hath the change restored;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The postboys have no reason to disparage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their fee; but ere the watered wheels may hiss hence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ostler pleads too for a reminiscence.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>'T is granted; and the valet mounts the dickey—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That gentleman of Lords and Gentlemen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also my Lady's gentlewoman, tricky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tricked out, but modest more than poet's pen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can paint,—<i>"Cosi viaggino i Ricchi!"</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Excuse a foreign slipslop now and then,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If but to show I've travelled: and what's Travel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless it teaches one to quote and cavil?)</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The London winter and the country summer</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were well nigh over. 'T is perhaps a pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Nature wears the gown that doth become her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lose those best months in a sweaty city,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wait until the nightingale grows dumber,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Listening debates not very wise or witty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere patriots their true <i>country</i> can remember;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there's no shooting (save grouse) till September.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I've done with my tirade. The World was gone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The twice two thousand, for whom Earth was made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were vanished to be what they call alone—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is, with thirty servants for parade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As many guests, or more; before whom groan</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As many covers, duly, daily laid.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let none accuse old England's hospitality—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its quantity is but condensed to quality.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord Henry and the Lady Adeline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Departed like the rest of their compeers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The peerage, to a mansion very fine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Gothic Babel of a thousand years.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>None than themselves could boast a longer line,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Time through heroes and through beauties steers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And oaks as olden as their pedigree</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Told of their Sires—a tomb in every tree.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A paragraph in every paper told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of their departure—such is modern fame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T is pity that it takes no further hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than an advertisement, or much the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, ere the ink be dry, the sound grows cold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Morning Post was foremost to proclaim—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Departure, for his country seat, to-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lord H. Amundeville and Lady A.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>"We understand the splendid host intends<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To entertain, this autumn, a select</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And numerous party of his noble friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'Midst whom we have heard, from sources quite correct,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Duke of D—— the shooting season spends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With many more by rank and fashion decked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also a foreigner of high condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The envoy of the secret Russian mission."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus we see—who doubts the Morning Post?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Whose articles are like the "Thirty-nine,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which those most swear to who believe them most)—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our gay Russ Spaniard was ordained to shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Decked by the rays reflected from his host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With those who, Pope says, "greatly daring dine."—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>'T is odd, but true,—last war the News abounded</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More with these dinners than the killed or wounded;—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As thus: "On Thursday there was a grand dinner;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Present, Lords A.B.C."—- Earls, dukes, by name</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Announced with no less pomp than Victory's winner:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then underneath, and in the very same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Column: date, "Falmouth. There has lately been here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Slap-dash regiment, so well known to Fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose loss in the late action we regret:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vacancies are filled up—see Gazette."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To Norman Abbey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> whirled the noble pair,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An old, old Monastery once, and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still older mansion—of a rich and rare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mixed Gothic, such as artists all allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few specimens yet left us can compare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Withal: it lies, perhaps, a little low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the monks preferred a hill behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To shelter their devotion from the wind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It stood embosomed in a happy valley,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Crowned by high woodlands, where the Druid oak<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stood like Caractacus, in act to rally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His host, with broad arms 'gainst the thunder-stroke;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from beneath his boughs were seen to sally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dappled foresters; as Day awoke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The branching stag swept down with all his herd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To quaff a brook which murmured like a bird.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Before the mansion lay a lucid Lake,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broad as transparent, deep, and freshly fed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By a river, which its softened way did take</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In currents through the calmer water spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Around: the wildfowl nestled in the brake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sedges, brooding in their liquid bed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The woods<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> sloped downwards to its brink, and stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With their green faces fixed upon the flood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Its outlet dashed into a deep cascade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sparkling with foam, until again subsiding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its shriller echoes—like an infant made<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quiet—sank into softer ripples, gliding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a rivulet; and thus allayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursued its course, now gleaming, and now hiding</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its windings through the woods; now clear, now blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According as the skies their shadows threw.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A glorious remnant of the Gothic pile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(While yet the Church was Rome's) stood half apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a grand Arch, which once screened many an aisle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These last had disappeared—a loss to Art:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first yet frowned superbly o'er the soil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kindled feelings in the roughest heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mourned the power of Time's or Tempest's march,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gazing on that venerable Arch.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Within a niche, nigh to its pinnacle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twelve Saints had once stood sanctified in stone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But these had fallen, not when the friars fell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But in the war which struck Charles from his throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When each house was a fortalice—as tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The annals of full many a line undone,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gallant Cavaliers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> who fought in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For those who knew not to resign or reign.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But in a higher niche, alone, but crowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Virgin-Mother of the God-born Child,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With her Son in her blesséd arms, looked round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Spared by some chance when all beside was spoiled:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She made the earth below seem holy ground.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This may be superstition, weak or wild;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even the faintest relics of a shrine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any worship wake some thoughts divine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A mighty window, hollow in the centre,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shorn of its glass of thousand colourings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which the deepened glories once could enter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Streaming from off the Sun like Seraph's wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now yawns all desolate: now loud, now fainter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gale sweeps through its fretwork, and oft sings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The owl his anthem, where the silenced quire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lie with their Hallelujahs quenched like fire.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But in the noontide of the moon, and when<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The wind is wingéd from one point of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There moans a strange unearthly sound, which then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is musical—a dying accent driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the huge Arch, which soars and sinks again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some deem it but the distant echo given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to the night wind by the waterfall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And harmonised by the old choral wall:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Others, that some original shape, or form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shaped by decay perchance, hath given the power</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though less than that of Memnon's statue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Egypt's rays, to harp at a fixed hour)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this grey ruin: with a voice to charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sad, but serene, it sweeps o'er tree or tower;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause I know not, nor can solve; but such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fact:—I've heard it,—once perhaps too much.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Amidst the court a Gothic fountain played,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Symmetrical, but decked with carvings quaint—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange faces, like to men in masquerade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And here perhaps a monster, there a saint:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spring gushed through grim mouths of granite made,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sparkled into basins, where it spent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its little torrent in a thousand bubbles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like man's vain Glory, and his vainer troubles.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Mansion's self was vast and venerable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With more of the monastic than has been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Elsewhere preserved: the cloisters still were stable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The cells, too, and Refectory, I ween:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An exquisite small chapel had been able,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Still unimpaired, to decorate the scene;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The rest had been reformed, replaced, or sunk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And spoke more of the baron than the monk.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Huge halls, long galleries, spacious chambers, joined</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By no quite lawful marriage of the arts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might shock a connoisseur; but when combined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Formed a whole which, irregular in parts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet left a grand impression on the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least of those whose eyes are in their hearts:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We gaze upon a giant for his stature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor judge at first if all be true to nature.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Steel Barons, molten the next generation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To silken rows of gay and gartered Earls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glanced from the walls in goodly preservation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Lady Marys blooming into girls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fair long locks, had also kept their station:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Countesses mature in robes and pearls:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also some beauties of Sir Peter Lely,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose drapery hints we may admire them freely.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Judges in very formidable ermine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were there, with brows that did not much invite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The accused to think their lordships would determine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His cause by leaning much from might to right:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bishops, who had not left a single sermon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Attorneys-general, awful to the sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As hinting more (unless our judgments warp us)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the "Star Chamber" than of "Habeas Corpus."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Generals, some all in armour, of the old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And iron time, ere lead had ta'en the lead;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others in wigs of Marlborough's martial fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Huger than twelve of our degenerate breed:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lordlings, with staves of white or keys of gold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nimrods, whose canvas scarce contained the steed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, here and there, some stern high patriot stood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who could not get the place for which he sued.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But ever and anon, to soothe your vision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fatigued with these hereditary glories,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There rose a Carlo Dolce or a Titian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wilder group of savage Salvatore's:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here danced Albano's boys, and here the sea shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Vernet's ocean lights; and there the stories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of martyrs awed, as Spagnoletto tainted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His brush with all the blood of all the sainted.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here sweetly spread a landscape of Lorraine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There Rembrandt made his darkness equal light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or gloomy Caravaggio's gloomier stain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bronzed o'er some lean and stoic anchorite:—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, lo! a Teniers woos, and not in vain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your eyes to revel in a livelier sight:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His bell-mouthed goblet makes me feel quite Danish<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Dutch with thirst—What, ho! a flask of Rhenish.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, reader! if that thou canst read,—and know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">'T is not enough to spell, or even to read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To constitute a reader—there must go</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtues of which both you and I have need;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Firstly, begin with the beginning—(though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That clause is hard); and secondly, proceed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thirdly, commence not with the end—or, sinning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this sort, end at last with the beginning.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, reader, thou hast patient been of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While I, without remorse of rhyme, or fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have built and laid out ground at such a rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dan Phoebus takes me for an auctioneer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Poets were so from their earliest date,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Homer's "Catalogue of ships" is clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But a mere modern must be moderate—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I spare you then the furniture and plate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The mellow Autumn came, and with it came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The promised party, to enjoy its sweets.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The corn is cut, the manor full of game;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The pointer ranges, and the sportsman beats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In russet jacket:—lynx-like in his aim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Full grows his bag, and wonder<i>ful</i> his feats.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, nutbrown partridges! Ah, brilliant pheasants!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ah, ye poachers!—'T is no sport for peasants.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An English Autumn, though it hath no vines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blushing with Bacchant coronals along</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The paths o'er which the far festoon entwines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The red grape in the sunny lands of song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath yet a purchased choice of choicest wines;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Claret light, and the Madeira strong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Britain mourn her bleakness, we can tell her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very best of vineyards is the cellar.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, if she hath not that serene decline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which makes the southern Autumn's day appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if 't would to a second Spring resign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The season, rather than to Winter drear,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of in-door comforts still she hath a mine,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea-coal fires,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> the "earliest of the year;"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without doors, too, she may compete in mellow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As what is lost in green is gained in yellow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And for the effeminate <i>villeggialura</i>—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rife with more horns than hounds—she hath the chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So animated that it might allure a</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saint from his beads to join the jocund race:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even Nimrod's self might leave the plains of Dura,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wear the Melton jacket for a space:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she hath no wild boars, she hath a tame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preserve of bores, who ought to be made game.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The noble guests,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> assembled at the Abbey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Consisted of—we give the sex the <i>pas</i>—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Duchess of Fitz-Fulke; the Countess Crabby;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ladies Scilly, Busey;—Miss Eclat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Miss Bombazeen, Miss Mackstay, Miss O'Tabby,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Mrs. Rabbi,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> the rich banker's squaw;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also the honourable Mrs. Sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who looked a white lamb, yet was a black sheep:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With other Countesses of Blank—but rank;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At once the "lie"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and the <i>élite</i> of crowds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who pass like water filtered in a tank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All purged and pious from their native clouds;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or paper turned to money by the Bank:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No matter how or why, the passport shrouds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The <i>passée</i> and the past; for good society</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is no less famed for tolerance than piety,—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That is, up to a certain point; which point</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forms the most difficult in punctuation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appearances appear to form the joint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On which it hinges in a higher station;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so that no explosion cry "Aroint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thee, witch!"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> or each Medea has her Jason;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or (to the point with Horace and with Pulci)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>"Omne tulit punctum,</i> quæ <i>miscuit utile dulci."</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I can't exactly trace their rule of right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which hath a little leaning to a lottery.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I've seen a virtuous woman put down quite</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the mere combination of a coterie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also a so-so matron boldly fight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her way back to the world by dint of plottery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shine the very <i>Siria</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> of the spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Escaping with a few slight, scarless sneers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have seen more than I'll say:—but we will see<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How <i>our "villeggiatura"</i> will get on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The party might consist of thirty-three</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of highest caste—the Brahmins of the <i>ton</i>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have named a few, not foremost in degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ta'en at hazard as the rhyme may run.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By way of sprinkling, scattered amongst these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There also were some Irish absentees.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was Parolles,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> too, the legal bully,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who limits all his battles to the Bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Senate: when invited elsewhere, truly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shows more appetite for words than war.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was the young bard Rackrhyme, who had newly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Come out and glimmered as a six weeks' star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was Lord Pyrrho, too, the great freethinker;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Sir John Pottledeep, the mighty drinker.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was the Duke of Dash,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> who was a—duke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">"Aye, every inch a" duke; there were twelve peers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Charlemagne's—and all such peers in <i>look</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And <i>intellect</i>, that neither eyes nor ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For commoners had ever them mistook.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There were the six Miss Rawbolds—pretty dears!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All song and sentiment; whose hearts were set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less on a convent than a coronet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There were four Honourable Misters, whose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Honour was more before their names than after;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was the <i>preux Chevalier de la Ruse</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whom France and Fortune lately deigned to waft here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose chiefly harmless talent was to amuse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the clubs found it rather serious laughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because—such was his magic power to please—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dice seemed charmed, too, with his repartees.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was Dick Dubious,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> the metaphysician,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who loved philosophy and a good dinner;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Angle, the <i>soi-disant</i> mathematician;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir Henry Silvercup, the great race-winner.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was the Reverend Rodomont Precisian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who did not hate so much the sin as sinner:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Lord Augustus Fitz-Plantagenet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good at all things, but better at a bet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was Jack Jargon, the gigantic guardsman;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And General Fireface,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> famous in the field,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great tactician, and no less a swordsman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who ate, last war, more Yankees than he killed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was the waggish Welsh Judge, Jefferies Hardsman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his grave office so completely skilled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That when a culprit came for condemnation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had his Judge's joke for consolation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Good company's a chess-board—there are kings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Queens, bishops, knights, rooks, pawns; the World's a game;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that the puppets pull at their own strings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Methinks gay Punch hath something of the same.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Muse, the butterfly hath but her wings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not stings, and flits through ether without aim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alighting rarely:—were she but a hornet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps there might be vices which would mourn it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I had forgotten—but must not forget—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An orator, the latest of the session,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who had delivered well a very set</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smooth speech, his first and maidenly transgression</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon debate: the papers echoed yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With his <i>début</i>, which made a strong impression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ranked with what is every day displayed—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"The best first speech that ever yet was made."</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Proud of his "Hear hims!" proud, too, of his vote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And lost virginity of oratory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud of his learning (just enough to quote),</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He revelled in his Ciceronian glory:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With memory excellent to get by rote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With wit to hatch a pun or tell a story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Graced with some merit, and with more effrontery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>"His country's pride," he came down to the country.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There also were two wits by acclamation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Longbow from Ireland,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> Strongbow from the Tweed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>—Both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>lawyers and both men of education—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Strongbow's wit was of more polished breed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longbow was rich in an imagination</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As beautiful and bounding as a steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sometimes stumbling over a potato,—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Strongbow's best things might have come from Cato.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Strongbow was like a new-tuned harpsichord;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Longbow wild as an Æolian harp,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With which the Winds of heaven can claim accord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And make a music, whether flat or sharp.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Strongbow's talk you would not change a word:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At Longbow's phrases you might sometimes carp:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both wits—one born so, and the other bred—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This by his heart—his rival by his head.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If all these seem an heterogeneous mass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be assembled at a country seat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet think, a specimen of every class</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is better than a humdrum tête-à-tête.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The days of Comedy are gone, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When Congreve's fool could vie with Molière's <i>bête</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Society is smoothed to that excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That manners hardly differ more than dress.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Our ridicules are kept in the back-ground—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ridiculous enough, but also dull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Professions, too, are no more to be found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Professional; and there is nought to cull<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Folly's fruit; for though your fools abound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They're barren, and not worth the pains to pull.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Society is now one polished horde,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Formed of two mighty tribes, the <i>Bores</i> and <i>Bored</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But from being farmers, we turn gleaners, gleaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The scanty but right-well threshed ears of Truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, gentle reader! when you gather meaning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You may be Boaz, and I—modest Ruth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Further I'd quote, but Scripture intervening</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forbids. A great impression in my youth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was made by Mrs. Adams, where she cries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"That Scriptures out of church are blasphemies."<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what we can we glean in this vile age<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of chaff, although our gleanings be not grist.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must not quite omit the talking sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kit-Cat, the famous Conversationist,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, in his common-place book, had a page</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prepared each morn for evenings. "List, oh list!"</span>
					<br/>
					<span>"Alas, poor ghost!"<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>—What unexpected woes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Await those who have studied their <i>bons-mots!</i></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Firstly, they must allure the conversation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By many windings to their clever clinch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And secondly, must let slip no occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor <i>bate</i> (abate) their hearers of an <i>inch</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But take an ell—and make a great sensation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If possible; and thirdly, never flinch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When some smart talker puts them to the test,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But seize the last word, which no doubt's the best.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord Henry and his lady were the hosts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The party we have touched on were the guests.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their table was a board to tempt even ghosts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pass the Styx for more substantial feasts.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I will not dwell upon <i>ragoûts</i> or roasts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albeit all human history attests</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That happiness for Man—the hungry sinner!—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since Eve ate apples, much depends on dinner.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Witness the lands which "flowed with milk and honey,"</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Held out unto the hungry Israelites:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To this we have added since, the love of money,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The only sort of pleasure which requites.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Youth fades, and leaves our days no longer sunny;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">We tire of mistresses and parasites;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oh, ambrosial cash! Ah! who would lose thee?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When we no more can use, or even abuse thee!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The gentlemen got up betimes to shoot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or hunt: the young, because they liked the sport—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first thing boys like after play and fruit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The middle-aged, to make the day more short;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For <i>ennui</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> is a growth of English root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though nameless in our language:—we retort</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fact for words, and let the French translate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That awful yawn which sleep can not abate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The elderly walked through the library,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tumbled books, or criticised the pictures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or sauntered through the gardens piteously,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And made upon the hot-house several strictures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or rode a nag which trotted not too high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or on the morning papers read their lectures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or on the watch their longing eyes would fix,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Longing at sixty for the hour of six.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But none were <i>gêné</i>: the great hour of union</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was rung by dinner's knell; till then all were</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Masters of their own time—or in communion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or solitary, as they chose to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hours, which how to pass is but to few known.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each rose up at his own, and had to spare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What time he chose for dress, and broke his fast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When, where, and how he chose for that repast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The ladies—some rouged, some a little pale—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Met the morn as they might. If fine, they rode,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or walked; if foul, they read, or told a tale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sung, or rehearsed the last dance from abroad;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discussed the fashion which might next prevail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And settled bonnets by the newest code,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or crammed twelve sheets into one little letter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make each correspondent a new debtor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For some had absent lovers, all had friends;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The earth has nothing like a she epistle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hardly Heaven—because it never ends—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I love the mystery of a female missal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which, like a creed, ne'er says all it intends,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But full of cunning as Ulysses' whistle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he allured poor Dolon:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>—you had better</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take care what you reply to such a letter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then there were billiards; cards, too, but <i>no</i> dice;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Save in the clubs no man of honour plays;—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boats when 't was water, skating when 't was ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the hard frost destroyed the scenting days:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And angling, too, that solitary vice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever Izaak Walton sings or says:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quaint, old, cruel coxcomb, in his gullet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should have a hook, and a small trout to pull it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With evening came the banquet and the wine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The conversazione—the duet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Attuned by voices more or less divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(My heart or head aches with the memory yet).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The four Miss Rawbolds in a glee would shine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But the two youngest loved more to be set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down to the harp—because to Music's charms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They added graceful necks, white hands and arms.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sometimes a dance (though rarely on field days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For then the gentlemen were rather tired)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Displayed some sylph-like figures in its maze;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then there was small-talk ready when required;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flirtation—but decorous; the mere praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of charms that should or should not be admired.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The hunters fought their fox-hunt o'er again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then retreated soberly—at ten.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The politicians, in a nook apart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Discussed the World, and settled all the spheres:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wits watched every loophole for their art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To introduce a <i>bon-mot</i> head and ears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Small is the rest of those who would be smart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moment's good thing may have cost them years</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before they find an hour to introduce it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, even <i>then</i>, some bore may make them lose it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But all was gentle and aristocratic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In this our party; polished, smooth, and cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Phidian forms cut out of marble Attic.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There now are no Squire Westerns, as of old;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And our Sophias are not so emphatic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But fair as then, or fairer to behold:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We have no accomplished blackguards, like Tom Jones,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But gentlemen in stays, as stiff as stones.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-13-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They separated at an early hour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That is, ere midnight—which is London's noon:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in the country ladies seek their bower</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little earlier than the waning moon.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Peace to the slumbers of each folded flower—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May the rose call back its true colour soon!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good hours of fair cheeks are the fairest tinters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lower the price of rouge—at least some winters.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
