<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-12-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of all the barbarous middle ages, that</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is most barbarous is the middle age</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of man! it is⁠—I really scarce know what;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But when we hover between fool and sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And don’t know justly what we would be at⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A period something like a printed page,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Black letter upon foolscap, while our hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grows grizzled, and we are not what we were;⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Too old for Youth⁠—too young, at thirty-five,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To herd with boys, or hoard with good threescore⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wonder people should be left alive;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But since they are, that epoch is a bore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love lingers still, although ’twere late to wive:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as for other love, the illusion’s o’er;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Money, that most pure imagination,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleams only through the dawn of its creation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-931" id="noteref-931" epub:type="noteref">931</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Gold! Why call we misers miserable?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-932" id="noteref-932" epub:type="noteref">932</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Theirs is the pleasure that can never pall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Theirs is the best bower anchor, the chain cable</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which holds fast other pleasures great and small.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye who but see the saving man at table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scorn his temperate board, as none at all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wonder how the wealthy can be sparing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Know not what visions spring from each cheese-paring.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Love or lust makes Man sick, and wine much sicker;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ambition rends, and gaming gains a loss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But making money, slowly first, then quicker,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And adding still a little through each cross</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which <em>will</em> come over things), beats Love or liquor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gamester’s counter, or the statesman’s <em>dross</em>.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O Gold! I still prefer thee unto paper,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which makes bank credit like a bank of <em>vapour</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who hold the balance of the World? Who reign</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er congress, whether royalist or liberal?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who rouse the shirtless patriots of Spain?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-933" id="noteref-933" epub:type="noteref">933</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(That make old Europe’s journals “squeak and gibber”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-934" id="noteref-934" epub:type="noteref">934</a> all)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who keep the World, both old and new, in pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or pleasure? Who make politics run glibber all?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The shade of Bonaparte’s noble daring?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Jew Rothschild,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-935" id="noteref-935" epub:type="noteref">935</a> and his fellow-Christian, Baring.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Those, and the truly liberal Lafitte,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-936" id="noteref-936" epub:type="noteref">936</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are the true Lords of Europe. Every loan</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not a merely speculative hit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But seats a Nation or upsets a Throne.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Republics also get involved a bit;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Columbia’s stock hath holders not unknown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On ’Change; and even thy silver soil, Peru,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must get itself discounted by a Jew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Why call the miser miserable? as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said before: the frugal life is his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in a saint or cynic ever was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The theme of praise: a hermit would not miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Canonization for the self-same cause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wherefore blame gaunt Wealth’s austerities?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because, you’ll say, nought calls for such a trial;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then there’s more merit in his self-denial.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He is your only poet;⁠—Passion, pure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sparkling on from heap to heap, displays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Possessed</em>, the ore, of which <em>mere hopes</em> allure</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nations athwart the deep: the golden rays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flash up in ingots from the mine obscure:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On him the Diamond pours its brilliant blaze,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the mild Emerald’s beam shades down the dies</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of other stones, to soothe the miser’s eyes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The lands on either side are his; the ship</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Ceylon, Inde, or far Cathay, unloads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For him the fragrant produce of each trip;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath his cars of Ceres groan the roads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the vine blushes like Aurora’s lip;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His very cellars might be Kings’ abodes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While he, despising every sensual call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commands⁠—the intellectual Lord of <em>all</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps he hath great projects in his mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To build a college, or to found a race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hospital, a church⁠—and leave behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some dome surmounted by his meagre face:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps he fain would liberate Mankind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even with the very ore which makes them base;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps he would be wealthiest of his nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or revel in the joys of calculation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But whether all, or each, or none of these</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May be the hoarder’s principle of action,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fool will call such mania a disease:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What is his <em>own</em>? Go⁠—look at each transaction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wars, revels, loves⁠—do these bring men more ease</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than the mere plodding through each “vulgar fraction?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or do they benefit Mankind? Lean Miser!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let spendthrifts’ heirs inquire of yours⁠—who’s wiser?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How beauteous are rouleaus! how charming chests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Containing ingots, bags of dollars, coins</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Not of old victors, all whose heads and crests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Weigh not the thin ore where their visage shines,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-937" id="noteref-937" epub:type="noteref">937</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But) of fine unclipped gold, where dully rests</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some likeness, which the glittering cirque confines,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of modern, reigning, sterling, stupid stamp!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes! ready money <em>is</em> Aladdin’s lamp.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-938" id="noteref-938" epub:type="noteref">938</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Love rules the Camp, the Court, the Grove⁠—for Love</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is Heaven, and Heaven is Love:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-939" id="noteref-939" epub:type="noteref">939</a>⁠—so sings the bard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which it were rather difficult to prove</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A thing with poetry in general hard).</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps there may be something in “the Grove,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least it rhymes to “Love:” but I’m prepared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To doubt (no less than landlords of their rental)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If “Courts” and “Camps” be quite so sentimental.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But if Love don’t, <em>Cash</em> does, and Cash alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cash rules the Grove, and fells it too besides;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without cash, camps were thin, and courts were none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without cash, Malthus tells you⁠—“take no brides.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-940" id="noteref-940" epub:type="noteref">940</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Cash rules Love the ruler, on his own</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High ground, as virgin Cynthia sways the tides:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as for “Heaven being Love,” why not say honey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is wax? Heaven is not Love, ’tis Matrimony.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Is not all Love prohibited whatever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Excepting Marriage? which is Love, no doubt,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After a sort; but somehow people never</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the same thought the two words have helped out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love may exist <em>with</em> Marriage, and <em>should</em> ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Marriage also may exist without;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Love sans banns is both a sin and shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And ought to go by quite another name.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now if the “Court,” and “Camp,” and “Grove,” be not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Recruited all with constant married men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who never coveted their neighbour’s lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say <em>that</em> line’s a lapsus of the pen;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strange too in my <i xml:lang="it">buon camerado</i> Scott,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So celebrated for his morals, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Jeffrey held him up as an example<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-941" id="noteref-941" epub:type="noteref">941</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me;⁠—of whom these morals are a sample.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-942" id="noteref-942" epub:type="noteref">942</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Well, if I don’t succeed, I <em>have</em> succeeded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that’s enough; succeeded in my youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only time when much success is needed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And my success produced what I, in sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Cared most about; it need not now be pleaded⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er it was, ’twas mine; I’ve paid, in truth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of late, the penalty of such success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But have not learned to wish it any less.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That suit in Chancery,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-943" id="noteref-943" epub:type="noteref">943</a>⁠—which some persons plead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In an appeal to the unborn, whom they,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the faith of their procreative creed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Baptize Posterity, or future clay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To me seems but a dubious kind of reed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lean on for support in any way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since odds are that Posterity will know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more of them, than they of her, I trow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-944" id="noteref-944" epub:type="noteref">944</a></p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Why, I’m Posterity⁠—and so are you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whom do we remember? Not a hundred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were every memory written down all true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The tenth or twentieth name would be but blundered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even Plutarch’s Lives have but picked out a few,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And ’gainst those few your annalists have thundered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Mitford<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-945" id="noteref-945" epub:type="noteref">945</a> in the nineteenth century</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gives, with Greek truth, the good old Greek the lie.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Good people all, of every degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye gentle readers and ungentle writers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this twelfth Canto ’tis my wish to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As serious as if I had for inditers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Malthus and Wilberforce:⁠—the last set free</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Negroes, and is worth a million fighters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Wellington has but enslaved the Whites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Malthus<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-946" id="noteref-946" epub:type="noteref">946</a> does the thing ’gainst which he writes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’m serious⁠—so are all men upon paper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And why should I not form my speculation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hold up to the Sun my little taper?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-947" id="noteref-947" epub:type="noteref">947</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mankind just now seem wrapped in meditation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On constitutions and steam-boats of vapour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While sages write against all procreation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless a man can calculate his means</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of feeding brats the moment his wife weans.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That’s noble! That’s romantic! For my part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I think that “Philo-genitiveness” is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Now here’s a word quite after my own heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though there’s a shorter a good deal than this,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that politeness set it not apart;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I’m resolved to say nought that’s amiss)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say, methinks that “Philo-genitiveness”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-948" id="noteref-948" epub:type="noteref">948</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might meet from men a little more forgiveness.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now to business.⁠—O my gentle Juan!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art in London⁠—in that pleasant place,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where every kind of mischief’s daily brewing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which can await warm Youth in its wild race.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true, that thy career is not a new one;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thou art no novice in the headlong chase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of early life; but this is a new land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which foreigners can never understand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What with a small diversity of climate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of hot or cold, mercurial or sedate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I could send forth my mandate like a Primate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the rest of Europe’s social state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thou art the most difficult to rhyme at,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Britain, which the Muse may penetrate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All countries have their “Lions,” but in thee</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is but one superb menagerie.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I am sick of politics. Begin⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“<i xml:lang="la">Paulo Majora.</i>” Juan, undecided</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst the paths of being “taken in,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Above the ice had like a skater glided:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-949" id="noteref-949" epub:type="noteref">949</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>When tired of play, he flirted without sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With some of those fair creatures who have prided</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Themselves on innocent tantalisation,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-950" id="noteref-950" epub:type="noteref">950</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hate all vice except its reputation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But these are few, and in the end they make</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some devilish escapade or stir, which shows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even the purest people may mistake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their way through Virtue’s primrose paths of snows;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then men stare, as if a new ass spake</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Balaam, and from tongue to ear o’erflows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quicksilver small talk, ending (if you note it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the kind World’s Amen⁠—“Who would have thought it?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The little Leila, with her Orient eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taciturn Asiatic disposition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Which saw all Western things with small surprise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the surprise of people of condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who think that novelties are butterflies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be pursued as food for inanition,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her charming figure and romantic history</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Became a kind of fashionable mystery.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The women much divided⁠—as is usual</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst the sex in little things or great⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Think not, fair creatures, that I mean to abuse you all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I have always liked you better than I state⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since I’ve grown moral, still I must accuse you all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of being apt to talk at a great rate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now there was a general sensation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Amongst you, about Leila’s education.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In one point only were you settled⁠—and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You had reason; ’twas that a young child of grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As beautiful as her own native land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And far away, the last bud of her race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Howe’er our friend Don Juan might command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself for five, four, three, or two years’ space,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would be much better taught beneath the eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of peeresses whose follies had run dry.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So first there was a generous emulation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then there was a general competition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To undertake the orphan’s education:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Juan was a person of condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It had been an affront on this occasion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To talk of a subscription or petition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sixteen dowagers, ten unwed she sages</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose tale belongs to “Hallam’s Middle Ages,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-951" id="noteref-951" epub:type="noteref">951</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And one or two sad, separate wives, without</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fruit to bloom upon their withering bough⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Begged to bring <em>up</em> the little girl, and “out”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that’s the phrase that settles all things now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meaning a virgin’s first blush at a rout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all her points as thorough-bred to show:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I assure you, that like virgin honey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tastes their first season (mostly if they have money).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How all the needy honourable misters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Each out-at-elbow peer, or desperate dandy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The watchful mothers, and the careful sisters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Who, by the by, when clever, are more handy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At making matches, where “ ’tis gold that glisters,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than their <em>he</em> relatives), like flies o’er candy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Buzz round “the Fortune” with their busy battery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To turn her head with waltzing and with flattery!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Each aunt, each cousin, hath her speculation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nay, married dames will now and then discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such pure disinterestedness of passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ve known them court an heiress for their lover.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Tantoene!</i>” Such the virtues of high station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the hopeful Isle, whose outlet’s “Dover!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While the poor rich wretch, object of these cares,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has cause to wish her sire had had male heirs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some are soon bagged, and some reject three dozen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis fine to see them scattering refusals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wild dismay o’er every angry cousin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Friends of the party), who begin accusals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as⁠—“Unless Miss Blank meant to have chosen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor Frederick, why did she accord perusals</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To his billets? <em>Why</em> waltz with him? Why, I pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look ‘Yes’ last night, and yet say ‘No’ to-day?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Why?⁠—Why?⁠—Besides, Fred really was <em>attached</em>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas not her fortune⁠—he has enough without;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The time will come she’ll wish that she had snatched</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So good an opportunity, no doubt:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the old Marchioness some plan had hatched,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As I’ll tell Aurea at to-morrow’s rout:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after all poor Frederick may do better⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pray did you see her answer to his letter?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Smart uniforms and sparkling coronets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are spurned in turn, until her turn arrives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After male loss of time, and hearts, and bets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the sweepstakes for substantial wives;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when at last the pretty creature gets</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some gentleman, who fights, or writes, or drives,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It soothes the awkward squad of the rejected</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To find how very badly she selected.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For sometimes they accept some long pursuer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Worn out with importunity; or fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(But here perhaps the instances are fewer)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To the lot of him who scarce pursued at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A hazy widower turned of forty ’s sure<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-952" id="noteref-952" epub:type="noteref">952</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-953" id="noteref-953" epub:type="noteref">953</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(If ’tis not vain examples to recall)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-954" id="noteref-954" epub:type="noteref">954</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To draw a high prize: now, howe’er he got her, I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>See nought more strange in this than t’ other lottery.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I, for my part⁠—(one “modern instance” more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“True, ’tis a pity⁠—pity ’tis, ’tis true”)⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-955" id="noteref-955" epub:type="noteref">955</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was chosen from out an amatory score,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Albeit my years were less discreet than few;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though I also had reformed before</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those became one who soon were to be two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll not gainsay the generous public’s voice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the young lady made a monstrous choice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, pardon my digression⁠—or at least</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Peruse! ’Tis always with a moral end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That I dissert, like grace before a feast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For like an agèd aunt, or tiresome friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rigid guardian, or a zealous priest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Muse by exhortation means to mend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All people, at all times, and in most places,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which puts my Pegasus to these grave paces.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now I’m going to be immoral; now</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I mean to show things really as they are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not as they ought to be: for I avow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That till we see what’s what in fact, we’re far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From much improvement with that virtuous plough</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which skims the surface, leaving scarce a scar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon the black loam long manured by Vice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only to keep its corn at the old price.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But first of little Leila we’ll dispose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-956" id="noteref-956" epub:type="noteref">956</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For like a day-dawn she was young and pure⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like the old comparison of snows,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-957" id="noteref-957" epub:type="noteref">957</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Which are more pure than pleasant, to be sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like many people everybody knows)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Don Juan was delighted to secure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A goodly guardian for his infant charge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who might not profit much by being at large.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Besides, he had found out he was no tutor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I wish that others would find out the same),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-958" id="noteref-958" epub:type="noteref">958</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rather wished in such things to stand neuter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For silly wards will bring their guardians blame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So when he saw each ancient dame a suitor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make his little wild Asiatic tame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Consulting “the Society for Vice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suppression,” Lady Pinchbeck was his choice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Olden she was⁠—but had been very young;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Virtuous she was⁠—and had been, I believe;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the World has such an evil tongue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That⁠—but my chaster ear will not receive</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An echo of a syllable that’s wrong:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-959" id="noteref-959" epub:type="noteref">959</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fact, there’s nothing makes me so much grieve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that abominable tittle-tattle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is the cud eschewed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-960" id="noteref-960" epub:type="noteref">960</a> by human cattle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Moreover I’ve remarked (and I was once</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A slight observer in a modest way),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so may every one except a dunce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That ladies in their youth a little gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides their knowledge of the World, and sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the sad consequence of going astray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are wiser in their warnings ’gainst the woe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the mere passionless can never know.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While the harsh prude indemnifies her virtue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By railing at the unknown and envied passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeking far less to save you than to hurt you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, what’s still worse, to put you out of fashion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The kinder veteran with calm words will court you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Entreating you to pause before you dash on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expounding and illustrating the riddle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of epic Love’s beginning⁠—end⁠—and middle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now whether it be thus, or that they are stricter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As better knowing why they should be so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think you’ll find from many a family picture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That daughters of such mothers as may know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World by experience rather than by lecture,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turn out much better for the Smithfield Show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of vestals brought into the marriage mart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than those bred up by prudes without a heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I said that Lady Pinchbeck had been talked about⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As who has not, if female, young, and pretty?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now no more the ghost of Scandal stalked about;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She merely was deemed amiable and witty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And several of her best <i xml:lang="fr">bons-mots</i> were hawked about:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then she was given to charity and pity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And passed (at least the latter years of life)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For being a most exemplary wife.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>High in high circles, gentle in her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She was the mild reprover of the young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whenever⁠—which means every day⁠—they’d shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An awkward inclination to go wrong.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The quantity of good she did ’s unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or at the least would lengthen out my song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In brief, the little orphan of the East</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had raised an interest in her⁠—which increased.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, too, was a sort of favourite with her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because she thought him a good heart at bottom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little spoiled, but not so altogether;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was a wonder, if you think who got him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And how he had been tossed, he scarce knew whither:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though this might ruin others, it did <em>not</em> him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least entirely⁠—for he had seen too many</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Changes in Youth, to be surprised at any.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And these vicissitudes tell best in youth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For when they happen at a riper age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>People are apt to blame the Fates, forsooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wonder Providence is not more sage.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adversity is the first path to Truth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He who hath proved War⁠—Storm⁠—or Woman’s rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether his winters be eighteen or eighty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath won the experience which is deemed so weighty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>How far it profits is another matter.⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our hero gladly saw his little charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe with a lady, whose last grown-up daughter</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being long married, and thus set at large,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had left all the accomplishments she taught her</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be transmitted, like the Lord Mayor’s barge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the next comer; or⁠—as it will tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More Muse-like⁠—like to Cytherea’s shell.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-961" id="noteref-961" epub:type="noteref">961</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I call such things transmission; for there is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A floating balance of accomplishment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which forms a pedigree from Miss to Miss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">According as their minds or backs are bent.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some waltz⁠—some draw⁠—some fathom the abyss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Metaphysics; others are content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Music; the most moderate shine as wits;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While others have a genius turned for fits.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But whether fits, or wits, or harpsichords⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Theology⁠—fine arts⁠—or finer stays,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May be the baits for Gentlemen or Lords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With regular descent, in these our days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last year to the new transfers its hoards;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">New vestals claim men’s eyes with the same praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of “elegant” et caetera, in fresh batches⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All matchless creatures⁠—and yet bent on matches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But now I will begin my poem. ’Tis</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps a little strange, if not quite new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That from the first of Cantos up to this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ve not begun what we have to go through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These first twelve books are merely flourishes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="es">Preludios</i>, trying just a string or two</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon my lyre, or making the pegs sure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when so, you shall have the overture.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>My Muses do not care a pinch of rosin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About what’s called success, or not succeeding:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such thoughts are quite below the strain they have chosen;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis a “great moral lesson”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-962" id="noteref-962" epub:type="noteref">962</a> they are reading.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I thought, at setting off, about two dozen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cantos would do; but at Apollo’s pleading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that my Pegasus should not be foundered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think to canter gently through a hundred.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan saw that Microcosm on stilts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yclept the Great World; for it is the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although the highest: but as swords have hilts</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which their power of mischief is increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Man in battle or in quarrel tilts,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus the low world, north, south, or west, or east,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must still obey the high<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-963" id="noteref-963" epub:type="noteref">963</a>⁠—which is their handle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their Moon, their Sun, their gas, their farthing candle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had many friends who had many wives, and was</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Well looked upon by both, to that extent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of friendship which you may accept or pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It does nor good nor harm; being merely meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep the wheels going of the higher class,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And draw them nightly when a ticket’s sent;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what with masquerades, and fêtes, and balls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For the first season such a life scarce palls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A young unmarried man, with a good name</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fortune, has an awkward part to play;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For good society is but a game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“The royal game of Goose,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-964" id="noteref-964" epub:type="noteref">964</a> as I may say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where everybody has some separate aim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An end to answer, or a plan to lay⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The single ladies wishing to be double,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The married ones to save the virgins trouble.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I don’t mean this as general, but particular</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Examples may be found of such pursuits:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though several also keep their perpendicular</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like poplars, with good principles for roots;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet many have a method more <em>reticular</em>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Fishers for men,” like Sirens with soft lutes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For talk six times with the same single lady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you may get the wedding-dresses ready.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps you’ll have a letter from the mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To say her daughter’s feelings are trepanned;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps you’ll have a visit from the brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All strut, and stays, and whiskers, to demand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What “your intentions are?”⁠—One way or other</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It seems the virgin’s heart expects your hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And between pity for her case and yours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll add to Matrimony’s list of cures.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’ve known a dozen weddings made even <em>thus</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some of them high names: I have also known</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young men who⁠—though they hated to discuss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pretensions which they never dreamed to have shown⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet neither frightened by a female fuss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor by mustachios moved, were let alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lived, as did the broken-hearted fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In happier plight than if they formed a pair.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There’s also nightly, to the uninitiated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A peril⁠—not indeed like Love or Marriage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not the less for this to be depreciated:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is⁠—I meant and mean not to disparage</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The show of Virtue even in the vitiated⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It adds an outward grace unto their carriage⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But to denounce the amphibious sort of harlot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i xml:lang="fr">Couleur de rose</i>, who’s neither white nor scarlet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Such is your cold coquette, who can’t say “No,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And won’t say “Yes,” and keeps you on and off-ing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On a lee-shore, till it begins to blow⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then sees your heart wrecked, with an inward scoffing.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This works a world of sentimental woe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-965" id="noteref-965" epub:type="noteref">965</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sends new Werters yearly to their coffin;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But yet is merely innocent flirtation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not quite adultery, but adulteration.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Ye gods, I grow a talker!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-966" id="noteref-966" epub:type="noteref">966</a> Let us prate.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The next of perils, though I place it <em>stern</em>est,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is when, without regard to Church or State,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A wife makes or takes love in upright earnest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abroad, such things decide few women’s fate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Such, early Traveller! is the truth thou learnest)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in old England, when a young bride errs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poor thing! Eve’s was a trifling case to hers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For ’tis a low, newspaper, humdrum, lawsuit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Country, where a young couple of the same ages<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-967" id="noteref-967" epub:type="noteref">967</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can’t form a friendship, but the world o’erawes it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then there’s the vulgar trick of those d⁠⸺⁠d damages!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A verdict⁠—grievous foe to those who cause it!⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forms a sad climax to romantic homages;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides those soothing speeches of the pleaders,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And evidences which regale all readers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But they who blunder thus are raw beginners;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A little genial sprinkling of hypocrisy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has saved the fame of thousand splendid sinners,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The loveliest oligarchs of our Gynocracy;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-968" id="noteref-968" epub:type="noteref">968</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>You may see such at all the balls and dinners,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Among the proudest of our aristocracy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So gentle, charming, charitable, chaste⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all by having <em>tact</em> as well as taste.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, who did not stand in the predicament</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a mere novice, had one safeguard more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For he was sick⁠—no, ’twas not the word <em>sick</em> I meant⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he had seen so much good love before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he was not in heart so very weak;⁠—I meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But thus much, and no sneer against the shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of white cliffs, white necks, blue eyes, bluer stockings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tithes, taxes, duns⁠—and doors with double knockings.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-969" id="noteref-969" epub:type="noteref">969</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But coming young from lands and scenes romantic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where lives, not lawsuits, must be risked for Passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Passion’s self must have a spice of frantic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a country where ’tis half a fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seemed to him half commercial, half pedantic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Howe’er he might esteem this moral nation:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides (alas! his taste⁠—forgive and pity!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At <em>first</em> he did not think the women pretty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I say at <em>first</em>⁠—for he found out at <em>last</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by degrees, that they were fairer far</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than the more glowing dames whose lot is cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the influence of the Eastern Star.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A further proof we should not judge in haste;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet inexperience could not be his bar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To taste:⁠—the truth is, if men would confess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That novelties <em>please</em> less than they <em>impress</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though travelled, I have never had the luck to</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trace up those shuffling negroes, Nile or Niger,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To that impracticable place Timbuktu,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Geography finds no one to oblige her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a chart as may be safely stuck to⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Europe ploughs in Afric like “<i xml:lang="la">bos piger</i>:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-970" id="noteref-970" epub:type="noteref">970</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if I <em>had been</em> at Timbuktu, there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt I should be told that black is fair.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-971" id="noteref-971" epub:type="noteref">971</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-972" id="noteref-972" epub:type="noteref">972</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is. I will not swear that black is white,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But I suspect in fact that white is black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the whole matter rests upon eye-sight:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ask a blind man, the best judge. You’ll attack</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps this new position⁠—but I’m right;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or if I’m wrong, I’ll not be ta’en aback:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He hath no morn nor night, but all is dark</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within⁠—and what seest thou? A dubious spark!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I’m relapsing into Metaphysics,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That labyrinth, whose clue is of the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Construction as your cures for hectic phthisics,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those bright moths fluttering round a dying flame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this reflection brings me to plain Physics,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And to the beauties of a foreign dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Compared with those of our pure pearls of price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those polar summers, <em>all</em> Sun, and some ice.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-973" id="noteref-973" epub:type="noteref">973</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-974" id="noteref-974" epub:type="noteref">974</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or say they are like virtuous mermaids, whose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beginnings are fair faces, ends mere fishes;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not that there’s not a quantity of those</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who have a due respect for their own wishes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Russians rushing from hot baths to snows<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-975" id="noteref-975" epub:type="noteref">975</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are they, at bottom virtuous even when vicious:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They warm into a scrape, but keep of course,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a reserve, a plunge into remorse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But this has nought to do with their outsides.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I said that Juan did not think them pretty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the first blush; for a fair Briton hides</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half her attractions⁠—probably from pity⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rather calmly into the heart glides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than storms it as a foe would take a city;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But once <em>there</em> (if you doubt this, prithee try)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-976" id="noteref-976" epub:type="noteref">976</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She keeps it for you like a true ally.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She cannot step as does an Arab barb,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-977" id="noteref-977" epub:type="noteref">977</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Andalusian girl from mass returning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor wear as gracefully as Gauls her garb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor in her eye Ausonia’s glance is burning;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her voice, though sweet, is not so fit to warb⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">le those bravuras (which I still am learning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To like, though I have been seven years in Italy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And have, or had, an ear that served me prettily);⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She cannot do these things, nor one or two</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others, in that off-hand and dashing style</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which takes so much⁠—to give the Devil his due;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor is she quite so ready with her smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor settles all things in one interview,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(A thing approved as saving time and toil);⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though the soil may give you time and trouble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Well cultivated, it will render double.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And if in fact she takes to a <i xml:lang="fr">grande passion</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is a very serious thing indeed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nine times in ten ’tis but caprice or fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Coquetry, or a wish to take the lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pride of a mere child with a new sash on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wish to make a rival’s bosom bleed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But the <em>tenth</em> instance will be a tornado,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For there’s no saying what they will or may do.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The reason’s obvious: if there’s an éclat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They lose their caste at once, as do the Parias;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the delicacies of the Law</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have filled their papers with their comments various,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Society, that china without flaw,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The Hypocrite!) will banish them like Marius,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To sit amidst the ruins of their guilt:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-978" id="noteref-978" epub:type="noteref">978</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Fame’s a Carthage not so soon rebuilt.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps this is as it should be;⁠—it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A comment on the Gospel’s “Sin no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And be thy sins forgiven:”⁠—but upon this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I leave the Saints to settle their own score.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abroad, though doubtless they do much amiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An erring woman finds an opener door</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For her return to Virtue⁠—as they call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Lady, who should be at home to all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-979" id="noteref-979" epub:type="noteref">979</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For me, I leave the matter where I find it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowing that such uneasy virtue leads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>People some ten times less in fact to mind it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And care but for discoveries, and not deeds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as for Chastity, you’ll never bind it</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all the laws the strictest lawyer pleads,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But aggravate the crime you have not prevented,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By rendering desperate those who had else repented.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan was no casuist, nor had pondered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the moral lessons of mankind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, he had not seen of several hundred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lady altogether to his mind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little blasé⁠—’tis not to be wondered</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At, that his heart had got a tougher rind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though not vainer from his past success,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt his sensibilities were less.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He also had been busy seeing sights⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Parliament and all the other houses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had sat beneath the Gallery at nights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hear debates whose thunder <em>roused</em> (not <em>rouses</em>)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The World to gaze upon those Northern Lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which flashed as far as where the musk-bull browses;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-980" id="noteref-980" epub:type="noteref">980</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had also stood at times behind the Throne⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Grey<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-981" id="noteref-981" epub:type="noteref">981</a> was not arrived, and Chatham gone.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-982" id="noteref-982" epub:type="noteref">982</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He saw, however, at the closing session,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That noble sight, when <em>really</em> free the nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A King in constitutional possession</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such a Throne as is the proudest station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Despots know it not⁠—till the progression</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Freedom shall complete their education.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not mere Splendour makes the show august</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To eye or heart⁠—it is the People’s trust.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There, too, he saw (whate’er he may be now)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A Prince, the prince of Princes at the time,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-983" id="noteref-983" epub:type="noteref">983</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With fascination in his very bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And full of promise, as the spring of prime.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though Royalty was written on his brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had <em>then</em> the grace, too, rare in every clime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of being, without alloy of fop or beau,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A finished Gentleman from top to toe.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-984" id="noteref-984" epub:type="noteref">984</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Juan was received, as hath been said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into the best society; and there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Occurred what often happens, I’m afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">However disciplined and debonnaire:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The talent and good humour he displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Besides the marked distinction of his air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exposed him, as was natural, to temptation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even though himself avoided the occasion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what, and where, with whom, and when, and why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not to be put hastily together;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as my object is Morality</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Whatever people say), I don’t know whether</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ll leave a single reader’s eyelid dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But harrow up his feelings till they wither,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hew out a huge monument of pathos,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Philip’s son proposed to do with Athos.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-985" id="noteref-985" epub:type="noteref">985</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here the twelfth canto of our Introduction</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ends. When the body of the Book’s begun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll find it of a different construction</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From what some people say ’t will be when done;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The plan at present ’s simply in concoction.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I can’t oblige you, reader, to read on;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s your affair, not mine: a real spirit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should neither court neglect, nor dread to bear it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And if my thunderbolt not always rattles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remember, reader! you have had before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worst of tempests and the best of battles,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That e’er were brewed from elements or gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides the most sublime of⁠—Heaven knows what else;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An usurer could scarce expect much more⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But my best canto⁠—save one on astronomy⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will turn upon “Political Economy.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-986" id="noteref-986" epub:type="noteref">986</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-12-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span><em>That</em> is your present theme for popularity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now that the public hedge hath scarce a stake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It grows an act of patriotic charity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To show the people the best way to break.</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>My plan</em> (but I, if but for singularity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reserve it) will be very sure to take.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime, read all the National-Debt sinkers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And tell me what you think of our great thinkers.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-987" id="noteref-987" epub:type="noteref">987</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
