<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-15" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</span>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-15-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah!⁠—What should follow slips from my reflection;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whatever follows ne’ertheless may be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As à-propos of Hope or Retrospection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though the lurking thought had followed free.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All present life is but an Interjection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An “Oh!” or “Ah!” of Joy or Misery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or a “Ha! ha!” or “Bah!”⁠—a yawn, or “Pooh!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which perhaps the latter is most true.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But, more or less, the whole’s a Syncopé</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or a <i xml:lang="la">Singultus</i>⁠—emblems of Emotion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The grand Antithesis to great Ennui,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wherewith we break our bubbles on the Ocean⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Watery Outline of Eternity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or miniature, at least, as is my notion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which ministers unto the Soul’s delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In seeing matters which are out of sight.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1105" id="noteref-1105" epub:type="noteref">1105</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But all are better than the sigh suppressed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Corroding in the cavern of the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Making the countenance a masque of rest<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1106" id="noteref-1106" epub:type="noteref">1106</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turning Human Nature to an art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few men dare show their thoughts of worst or best;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dissimulation always sets apart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A corner for herself; and, therefore, Fiction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that which passes with least contradiction.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Ah! who can tell? Or rather, who can not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remember, without telling, Passion’s errors?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The drainer of Oblivion, even the sot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hath got <em>blue devils</em> for his morning mirrors:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though on Lethe’s stream he seem to float,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He cannot sink his tremours or his terrors;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ruby glass that shakes within his hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Leaves a sad sediment of Time’s worst sand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And as for Love⁠—O Love!⁠—We will proceed:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Lady Adeline Amundeville,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pretty name as one would wish to read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must perch harmonious on my tuneful quill.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s Music in the sighing of a reed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There’s Music in the gushing of a rill;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s Music in all things, if men had ears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their Earth is but an echo of the Spheres.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Lady Adeline, Right Honourable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And honoured, ran a risk of growing less so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For few of the soft sex are very stable</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In their resolves⁠—alas! that I should say so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They differ as wine differs from its label,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When once decanted;⁠—I presume to guess so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But will not swear: yet both upon occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till old, may undergo adulteration.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Adeline was of the purest vintage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The unmingled essence of the grape; and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bright as a new napoleon from its mintage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or glorious as a diamond richly set;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A page where Time should hesitate to print age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for which Nature might forego her debt⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1107" id="noteref-1107" epub:type="noteref">1107</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sole creditor whose process doth involve in’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The luck of finding everybody solvent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>O Death! thou dunnest of all duns! thou daily</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knockest at doors, at first with modest tap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a meek tradesman when approaching palely</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some splendid debtor he would take by sap:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oft denied, as Patience ’gins to fail, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Advances with exasperated rap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And (if let in) insists, in terms unhandsome,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On ready money, or “a draft on Ransom.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1108" id="noteref-1108" epub:type="noteref">1108</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whate’er thou takest, spare awhile poor Beauty!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She is so rare, and thou hast so much prey.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What though she now and then may slip from duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The more’s the reason why you ought to stay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gaunt Gourmand! with whole nations for your booty⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1109" id="noteref-1109" epub:type="noteref">1109</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You should be civil in a modest way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Suppress, then, some slight feminine diseases,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And take as many heroes as Heaven pleases.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fair Adeline, the more ingenuous</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where she was interested (as was said),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because she was not apt, like some of us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To like too readily, or too high bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show it⁠—(points we need not now discuss)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would give up artlessly both Heart and Head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unto such feelings as seemed innocent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For objects worthy of the sentiment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some parts of Juan’s history, which Rumour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That live Gazette, had scattered to disfigure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had heard; but Women hear with more good humour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such aberrations than we men of rigour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, his conduct, since in England, grew more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Strict, and his mind assumed a manlier vigour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he had, like Alcibiades,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The art of living in all climes with ease.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1110" id="noteref-1110" epub:type="noteref">1110</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His manner was perhaps the more seductive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because he ne’er seemed anxious to seduce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nothing affected, studied, or constructive</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of coxcombry or conquest: no abuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of his attractions marred the fair perspective,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To indicate a Cupidon broke loose,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1111" id="noteref-1111" epub:type="noteref">1111</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And seem to say, “Resist us if you can”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which makes a Dandy while it spoils a Man.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They are wrong⁠—that’s not the way to set about it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, if they told the truth, could well be shown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, right or wrong, Don Juan was without it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In fact, his manner was his own alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sincere he was⁠—at least you could not doubt it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In listening merely to his voice’s tone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Devil hath not in all his quiver’s choice</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An arrow for the Heart like a sweet voice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By nature soft, his whole address held off</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Suspicion: though not timid, his regard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was such as rather seemed to keep aloof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To shield himself than put <em>you</em> on your guard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps ’twas hardly quite assured enough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Modesty’s at times its own reward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Virtue; and the absence of pretension</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will go much farther than there’s need to mention.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Serene, accomplished, cheerful but not loud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Insinuating without insinuation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Observant of the foibles of the crowd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet ne’er betraying this in conversation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Proud with the proud, yet courteously proud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So as to make them feel he knew his station</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And theirs:⁠—without a struggle for priority,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He neither brooked nor claimed superiority⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That is, with Men: with Women he was what</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They pleased to make or take him for; and their</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imagination’s quite enough for that:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that the outline’s tolerably fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They fill the canvas up⁠—and “<i xml:lang="la">verbum sat.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1112" id="noteref-1112" epub:type="noteref">1112</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If once their fantasies be brought to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon an object, whether sad or playful,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They can transfigure brighter than a Raphael.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1113" id="noteref-1113" epub:type="noteref">1113</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Adeline, no deep judge of character,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was apt to add a colouring from her own:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis thus the Good will amiably err,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And eke the Wise, as has been often shown.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Experience is the chief philosopher,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But saddest when his science is well known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And persecuted Sages teach the Schools</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their folly in forgetting there are fools.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Was it not so, great Locke? and greater Bacon?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great Socrates? And thou, Diviner still,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1114" id="noteref-1114" epub:type="noteref">1114</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose lot it is by Man to be mistaken,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1115" id="noteref-1115" epub:type="noteref">1115</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thy pure creed made sanction of all ill?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Redeeming Worlds to be by bigots shaken,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1116" id="noteref-1116" epub:type="noteref">1116</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How was thy toil rewarded? We might fill</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Volumes with similar sad illustrations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But leave them to the conscience of the nations.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I perch upon an humbler promontory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amidst Life’s infinite variety:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With no great care for what is nicknamed Glory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But speculating as I cast mine eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On what may suit or may not suit my story,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never straining hard to versify,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I rattle on exactly as I’d talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With anybody in a ride or walk.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I don’t know that there may be much ability</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shown in this sort of desultory rhyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there’s a conversational facility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which may round off an hour upon a time.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this I’m sure at least, there’s no servility</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In mine irregularity of chime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which rings what’s uppermost of new or hoary,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1117" id="noteref-1117" epub:type="noteref">1117</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as I feel the <i xml:lang="it">Improvvisatore</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Omnia vult <em>belle</em> Matho dicere⁠—dic aliquando</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i xml:lang="la">Et <em>bene</em>, dic <em>neutrum</em>, dic aliquando <em>male</em>.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1118" id="noteref-1118" epub:type="noteref">1118</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first is rather more than mortal can do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The second may be sadly done or gaily;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The third is still more difficult to stand to;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fourth we hear, and see, and say too, daily:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The whole together is what I could wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To serve in this conundrum of a dish.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A modest hope⁠—but Modesty’s my forte,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Pride my feeble:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1119" id="noteref-1119" epub:type="noteref">1119</a>⁠—let us ramble on.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I meant to make this poem very short,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But now I can’t tell where it may not run.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1120" id="noteref-1120" epub:type="noteref">1120</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt, if I had wished to pay my court</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To critics, or to hail the <em>setting</em> sun</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Tyranny of all kinds, my concision<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1121" id="noteref-1121" epub:type="noteref">1121</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were more;⁠—but I was born for opposition.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But then ’tis mostly on the weaker side;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that I verily believe if they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who now are basking in their full-blown pride<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1122" id="noteref-1122" epub:type="noteref">1122</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were shaken down, and “dogs had had their day,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1123" id="noteref-1123" epub:type="noteref">1123</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though at the first I might perchance deride</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their tumble, I should turn the other way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wax an ultra-royalist in Loyalty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I hate even democratic Royalty.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1124" id="noteref-1124" epub:type="noteref">1124</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I think I should have made a decent spouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If I had never proved the soft condition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think I should have made monastic vows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for my own peculiar superstition:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst rhyme I never should have knocked my brows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor broken my own head, nor that of Priscian,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1125" id="noteref-1125" epub:type="noteref">1125</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor worn the motley mantle of a poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If some one had not told me to forego it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1126" id="noteref-1126" epub:type="noteref">1126</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But <i xml:lang="fr">laissez aller</i>⁠—Knights and Dames I sing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as the times may furnish. ’Tis a flight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which seems at first to need no lofty wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Plumed by Longinus or the Stagyrite:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1127" id="noteref-1127" epub:type="noteref">1127</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The difficulty lies in colouring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Keeping the due proportions still in sight)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Nature manners which are artificial,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And rend’ring general that which is especial.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The difference is, that in the days of old</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Men made the Manners; Manners now make men⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pinned like a flock, and fleeced too in their fold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least nine, and a ninth beside of ten.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now this at all events must render cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your writers, who must either draw again</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Days better drawn before, or else assume</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The present, with their common-place costume.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We’ll do our best to make the best on ’t:⁠—March!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">March, my Muse! If you cannot fly, yet flutter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when you may not be sublime, be arch,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or starch, as are the edicts statesmen utter.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We surely may find something worth research:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Columbus found a new world in a cutter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or brigantine, or pink, of no great tonnage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While yet America was in her non-age.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1128" id="noteref-1128" epub:type="noteref">1128</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Adeline, in all her growing sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Juan’s merits and his situation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt on the whole an interest intense⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Partly perhaps because a fresh sensation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that he had an air of innocence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is for Innocence a sad temptation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Women hate half measures, on the whole,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1129" id="noteref-1129" epub:type="noteref">1129</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ’gan to ponder how to save his soul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She had a good opinion of Advice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like all who give and eke receive it gratis,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For which small thanks are still the market price,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even where the article at highest rate is:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thought upon the subject twice or thrice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And morally decided⁠—the best state is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Morals⁠—Marriage; and, this question carried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She seriously advised him to get married.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan replied, with all becoming deference,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He had a predilection for that tie;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that, at present, with immediate reference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To his own circumstances, there might lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some difficulties, as in his own preference,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that of her to whom he might apply:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That still he’d wed with such or such a lady,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If that they were not married all already.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Next to the making matches for herself,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And daughters, brothers, sisters, kith or kin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Arranging them like books on the same shelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There’s nothing women love to dabble in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More (like a stock-holder in growing pelf)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than match-making in general: ’tis no sin</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certes, but a preventative, and therefore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is, no doubt, the only reason wherefore.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But never yet (except of course a miss</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwed, or mistress never to be wed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or wed already, who object to this)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was there chaste dame who had not in her head</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some drama of the marriage Unities,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Observed as strictly both at board and bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those of Aristotle, though sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They turn out Melodrames or Pantomimes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They generally have some only son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some heir to a large property, some friend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an old family, some gay Sir John,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or grave Lord George, with whom perhaps might end</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A line, and leave Posterity undone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless a marriage was applied to mend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The prospect and their morals: and besides,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They have at hand a blooming glut of brides.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From these they will be careful to select,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For this an heiress, and for that a beauty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For one a songstress who hath no defect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For t’ other one who promises much duty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this a lady no one can reject,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose sole accomplishments were quite a booty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second for her excellent connections;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A third, because there can be no objections.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Rapp the Harmonist embargoed Marriage<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1130" id="noteref-1130" epub:type="noteref">1130</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his harmonious settlement⁠—(which flourishes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strangely enough as yet without miscarriage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because it breeds no more mouths than it nourishes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without those sad expenses which disparage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What Nature naturally most encourages)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why called he “Harmony” a state sans wedlock?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now here I’ve got the preacher at a dead lock.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Because he either meant to sneer at Harmony</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Marriage, by divorcing them thus oddly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whether reverend Rapp learned this in Germany</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or no, ’tis said his sect is rich and godly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pious and pure, beyond what I can term any</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ours, although they propagate more broadly.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My objection’s to his title, not his ritual.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although I wonder how it grew habitual.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1131" id="noteref-1131" epub:type="noteref">1131</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Rapp is the reverse of zealous matrons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who favour, malgré Malthus, Generation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Professors of that genial art, and patrons</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the modest part of Propagation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which after all at such a desperate rate runs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That half its produce tends to Emigration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That sad result of passions and potatoes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two weeds which pose our economic Catos.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Had Adeline read Malthus? I can’t tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wish she had: his book’s the eleventh commandment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which says, “Thou shall not marry,” unless <em>well</em>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This he (as far as I can understand) meant.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis not my purpose on his views to dwell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor canvass what “so eminent a hand” meant;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1132" id="noteref-1132" epub:type="noteref">1132</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, certes, it conducts to lives ascetic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or turning Marriage into Arithmetic.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Adeline, who probably presumed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Juan had enough of maintenance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or <em>separate</em> maintenance, in case ’twas doomed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As on the whole it is an even chance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bridegrooms, after they are fairly <em>groomed</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May retrograde a little in the Dance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Marriage⁠—(which might form a painter’s fame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Holbein’s “Dance of Death”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1133" id="noteref-1133" epub:type="noteref">1133</a>⁠—but ’tis the same)⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Adeline determined Juan’s wedding</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In her own mind, and that’s enough for Woman:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then, with whom? There was the sage Miss Reading,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Miss Raw, Miss Flaw, Miss Showman, and Miss Knowman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1134" id="noteref-1134" epub:type="noteref">1134</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the two fair co-heiresses Giltbedding.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She deemed his merits something more than common:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All these were unobjectionable matches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And might go on, if well wound up, like watches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was Miss Millpond, smooth as summer’s sea,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1135" id="noteref-1135" epub:type="noteref">1135</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That usual paragon, an only daughter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who seemed the cream of Equanimity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till skimmed⁠—and then there was some milk and water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a slight shade of blue too, it might be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the surface; but what did it matter?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s riotous, but Marriage should have quiet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And being consumptive, live on a milk diet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then there was the Miss Audacia Shoestring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A dashing demoiselle of good estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose heart was fixed upon a star or blue string;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But whether English Dukes grew rare of late,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or that she had not harped upon the true string,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which such Sirens can attract our great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took up with some foreign younger brother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Russ or Turk⁠—the one’s as good as t’ other.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then there was⁠—but why should I go on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unless the ladies should go off?⁠—there was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed a certain fair and fairy one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the best class, and better than her class⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora Raby, a young star who shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er Life, too sweet an image for such glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lovely being, scarcely formed or moulded,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rose with all its sweetest leaves yet folded;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Rich, noble, but an orphan⁠—left an only</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Child to the care of guardians good and kind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still her aspect had an air so lonely;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Blood is not water; and where shall we find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feelings of Youth like those which overthrown lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Death, when we are left, alas! behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel, in friendless palaces, a home</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is wanting, and our best ties in the tomb?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Early in years, and yet more infantine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In figure, she had something of Sublime</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In eyes which sadly shone, as Seraphs’ shine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All Youth⁠—but with an aspect beyond Time;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Radiant and grave⁠—as pitying Man’s decline;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Mournful⁠—but mournful of another’s crime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She looked as if she sat by Eden’s door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grieved for those who could return no more.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She was a Catholic, too, sincere, austere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As far as her own gentle heart allowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deemed that fallen worship far more dear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps because ’twas fallen: her Sires were proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of deeds and days when they had filled the ear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of nations, and had never bent or bowed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To novel power; and as she was the last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She held their old faith and old feelings fast.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She gazed upon a World she scarcely knew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As seeking not to know it; silent, lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As grows a flower, thus quietly she grew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kept her heart serene within its zone.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was awe in the homage which she drew;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Spirit seemed as seated on a throne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart from the surrounding world, and strong</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In its own strength⁠—most strange in one so young!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now it so happened, in the catalogue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Adeline, Aurora was omitted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although her birth and wealth had given her vogue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the charmers we have already cited;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her beauty also seemed to form no clog</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Against her being mentioned as well fitted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By many virtues, to be worth the trouble</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of single gentlemen who would be double.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And this omission, like that of the bust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Brutus at the pageant of Tiberius,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1136" id="noteref-1136" epub:type="noteref">1136</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made Juan wonder, as no doubt he must.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This he expressed half smiling and half serious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When Adeline replied with some disgust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with an air, to say the least, imperious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She marvelled “what he saw in such a baby</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As that prim, silent, cold Aurora Raby?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan rejoined⁠—“She was a Catholic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And therefore fittest, as of his persuasion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since he was sure his mother would fall sick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the Pope thunder excommunication,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If⁠—” But here Adeline, who seemed to pique</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herself extremely on the inoculation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of others with her own opinions, stated⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As usual⁠—the same reason which she late did.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And wherefore not? A reasonable reason,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If good, is none the worse for repetition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If bad, the best way’s certainly to tease on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And amplify: you lose much by concision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whereas insisting in or out of season</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Convinces all men, even a politician;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or⁠—what is just the same⁠—it wearies out.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So the end’s gained, what signifies the route?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span><em>Why</em> Adeline had this slight prejudice⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For prejudice it was⁠—against a creature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As pure, as Sanctity itself, from Vice⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the added charm of form and feature⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For me appears a question far too nice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since Adeline was liberal by nature;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Nature’s Nature, and has more caprices</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than I have time, or will, to take to pieces.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Perhaps she did not like the quiet way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With which Aurora on those baubles looked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which charm most people in their earlier day:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For there are few things by Mankind less brooked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Womankind too, if we so may say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than finding thus their genius stand rebuked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like “Antony’s by Caesar,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1137" id="noteref-1137" epub:type="noteref">1137</a> by the few</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who look upon them as they ought to do.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was not envy⁠—Adeline had none;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her place was far beyond it, and her mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was not scorn⁠—which could not light on one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose greatest <em>fault</em> was leaving few to find:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was not jealousy, I think⁠—but shun</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Following the ignes fatui of Mankind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was not⁠—but ’tis easier far, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say what it was <em>not</em> than what it was.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Little Aurora deemed she was the theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such discussion. She was there a guest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A beauteous ripple of the brilliant stream</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Rank and Youth, though purer than the rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which flowed on for a moment in the beam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Time sheds a moment o’er each sparkling crest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had she known this, she would have calmly smiled⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had so much, or little, of the child.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The dashing and proud air of Adeline</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Imposed not upon her: she saw her blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Much as she would have seen a glow-worm shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then turned unto the stars for loftier rays.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan was something she could not divine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being no Sibyl in the new world’s ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she was nothing dazzled by the meteor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because she did not pin her faith on feature.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His fame too⁠—for he had that kind of fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sometimes plays the deuce with Womankind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A heterogeneous mass of glorious blame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half virtues and whole vices being combined;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Faults which attract because they are not tame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Follies tricked out so brightly that they blind:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These seals upon her wax made no impression,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was her coldness or her self-possession.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan knew nought of such a character⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">High, yet resembling not his lost Haidée;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet each was radiant in her proper sphere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The island girl, bred up by the lone sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More warm, as lovely, and not less sincere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was Nature’s all: Aurora could not be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor would be thus:⁠—the difference in them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was such as lies between a flower and gem.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Having wound up with this sublime comparison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Methinks we may proceed upon our narrative,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as my friend Scott says, “I sound my warison;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1138" id="noteref-1138" epub:type="noteref">1138</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scott, the superlative of my comparative⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scott, who can paint your Christian knight or Saracen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Serf⁠—Lord⁠—Man, with such skill as none would share it, if</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There had not been one Shakespeare and Voltaire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one or both of whom he seems the heir.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1139" id="noteref-1139" epub:type="noteref">1139</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I say, in my slight way I may proceed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To play upon the surface of Humanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I write the World, nor care if the World read,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least for this I cannot spare its vanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Muse hath bred, and still perhaps may breed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More foes by this same scroll: when I began it, I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought that it might turn out so⁠—<em>now I know it</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1140" id="noteref-1140" epub:type="noteref">1140</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still I am, or was, a pretty poet.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The conference or congress (for it ended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Congresses of late do) of the Lady</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Adeline and Don Juan rather blended</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some acids with the sweets⁠—for she was heady;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But, ere the matter could be marred or mended,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The silvery bell rang, not for “dinner ready,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for that hour, called <em>half-hour</em>, given to dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though ladies’ robes seem scant enough for less.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Great things were now to be achieved at table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With massy plate for armour, knives and forks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For weapons; but what Muse since Homer’s able</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(His feasts are not the worst part of his works)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To draw up in array a single day-bill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of modern dinners? where more mystery lurks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In soups or sauces, or a sole ragoût,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than witches, b‑ches, or physicians, brew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was a goodly “<i xml:lang="fr">soupe à la <em>bonne femme</em></i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1141" id="noteref-1141" epub:type="noteref">1141</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though God knows whence it came from; there was, too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A turbot for relief of those who cram,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Relieved with “<i xml:lang="fr">dindon à la Périgeux;</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There also was⁠—the sinner that I am!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How shall I get this gourmand stanza through?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="fr">Soupe à la Beauveau</i>,” whose relief was dory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Relieved itself by pork, for greater glory.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I must crowd all into one grand mess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or mass; for should I stretch into detail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My Muse would run much more into excess,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than when some squeamish people deem her frail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though a <i xml:lang="fr">bonne vivante</i>, I must confess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her stomach’s not her peccant part; this tale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>However doth require some slight refection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just to relieve her spirits from dejection.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fowls “<i xml:lang="fr">à la Condé</i>,” slices eke of salmon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With “<i xml:lang="fr">sauces Génevoises</i>,” and haunch of venison;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Wines too, which might again have slain young Ammon⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1142" id="noteref-1142" epub:type="noteref">1142</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man like whom I hope we shan’t see many soon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They also set a glazed Westphalian ham on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whereon Apicius would bestow his benison;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then there was champagne with foaming whirls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As white as Cleopatra’s melted pearls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then there was God knows what “<i xml:lang="fr">à l’Allemande</i>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“<i xml:lang="fr">À l’Espagnole</i>,” “<i xml:lang="fr">timballe</i>,” and “<i xml:lang="es">salpicon</i>”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With things I can’t withstand or understand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though swallowed with much zest upon the whole;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And “entremets” to piddle with at hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gently to lull down the subsiding soul;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While great Lucullus’ Robe triumphal muffles⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(<em>There’s fame</em>)⁠—young partridge fillets, decked with truffles.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1143" id="noteref-1143" epub:type="noteref">1143</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>What are the <em>fillets</em> on the Victor’s brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To these? They are rags or dust. Where is the arch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which nodded to the nation’s spoils below?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where the triumphal chariots’ haughty march?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gone to where Victories must like dinners go.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Farther I shall not follow the research:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But oh! ye modern Heroes with your cartridges,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When will your names lend lustre e’en to partridges?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Those truffles too are no bad accessaries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Followed by “<i xml:lang="fr">petits puits d’amour</i>”⁠—a dish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which perhaps the cookery rather varies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So every one may dress it to his wish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According to the best of dictionaries,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which encyclopedize both flesh and fish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But even, sans confitures, it no less true is,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s pretty picking in those <i xml:lang="fr">petits puits</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1144" id="noteref-1144" epub:type="noteref">1144</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The mind is lost in mighty contemplation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of intellect expanded on two courses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Indigestion’s grand multiplication</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Requires arithmetic beyond my forces.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who would suppose, from Adam’s simple ration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That cookery could have called forth such resources,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As form a science and a nomenclature</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From out the commonest demands of Nature?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The glasses jingled, and the palates tingled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The diners of celebrity dined well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ladies with more moderation mingled</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the feast, pecking less than I can tell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also the younger men too: for a springald</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can’t, like ripe Age, in gourmandise excel,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thinks less of good eating than the whisper</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(When seated next him) of some pretty lisper.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! I must leave undescribed the <i xml:lang="fr">gibier</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The <em>salmi</em>, the consommé, the purée,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All which I use to make my rhymes run glibber</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than could roast beef in our rough John Bull way:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must not introduce even a spare rib here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Bubble and squeak” would spoil my liquid lay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I have dined, and must forego, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The chaste description even of a “<i xml:lang="fr">bécasse;</i>”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And fruits, and ice, and all that Art refines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Nature for the service of the <i xml:lang="fr">goût</i>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>Taste</em> or the <em>gout</em>⁠—pronounce it as inclines</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your stomach! Ere you dine, the French will do;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <em>after</em>, there are sometimes certain signs</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which prove plain English truer of the two.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hast ever <em>had</em> the <em>gout</em>? I have not had it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I may have, and you too, reader, dread it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The simple olives, best allies of wine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Must I pass over in my bill of fare?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I must, although a favourite <i xml:lang="fr">plat</i> of mine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In Spain, and Lucca, Athens, everywhere:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On them and bread ’twas oft my luck to dine⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The grass my table-cloth, in open air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Sunium or Hymettus, like Diogenes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of whom half my philosophy the progeny is.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1145" id="noteref-1145" epub:type="noteref">1145</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Amidst this tumult of fish, flesh, and fowl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And vegetables, all in masquerade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The guests were placed according to their roll,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But various as the various meats displayed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don Juan sat next an “<i xml:lang="fr">à l’Espagnole</i>”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No damsel, but a dish, as hath been said;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1146" id="noteref-1146" epub:type="noteref">1146</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But so far like a lady, that ’twas drest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Superbly, and contained a world of zest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>By some odd chance too, he was placed between</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aurora and the Lady Adeline⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A situation difficult, I ween,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For man therein, with eyes and heart, to dine.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also the conference which we have seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not such as to encourage him to shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Adeline, addressing few words to him,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With two transcendent eyes seemed to look through him.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I sometimes almost think that eyes have ears:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This much is sure, that, out of earshot, things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are somehow echoed to the pretty dears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which I can’t tell whence their knowledge springs.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like that same mystic music of the spheres,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which no one hears, so loudly though it rings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis wonderful how oft the sex have heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Long dialogues⁠—which passed without a word!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aurora sat with that indifference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which piques a <i xml:lang="fr">preux chevalier</i>⁠—as it ought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all offences that’s the worst offence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which seems to hint you are not worth a thought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Juan, though no coxcomb in pretence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was not exactly pleased to be so caught;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like a good ship entangled among ice⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And after so much excellent advice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To his gay nothings, nothing was replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or something which was nothing, as Urbanity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Required. Aurora scarcely looked aside,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor even smiled enough for any vanity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Devil was in the girl! Could it be pride?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or modesty, or absence, or inanity?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heaven knows! But Adeline’s malicious eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sparkled with her successful prophecies,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And looked as much as if to say, “I said it;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A kind of triumph I’ll not recommend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because it sometimes, as I have seen or read it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both in the case of lover and of friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will pique a gentleman, for his own credit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bring what was a jest to a serious end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all men prophesy what <em>is</em> or <em>was</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hate those who won’t let them come to pass.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan was drawn thus into some attentions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slight but select, and just enough to express,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To females of perspicuous comprehensions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he would rather make them more than less.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora at the last (so history mentions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though probably much less a fact than guess)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So far relaxed her thoughts from their sweet prison,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As once or twice to smile, if not to listen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>From answering she began to question: this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With her was rare; and Adeline, who as yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thought her predictions went not much amiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began to dread she’d thaw to a coquette⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So very difficult, they say, it is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep extremes from meeting, when once set</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In motion; but she here too much refined⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora’s spirit was not of that kind.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Juan had a sort of winning way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A proud humility, if such there be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which showed such deference to what females say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if each charming word were a decree.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His tact, too, tempered him from grave to gay,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taught him when to be reserved or free:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had the art of drawing people out,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without their seeing what he was about.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aurora, who in her indifference</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Confounded him in common with the crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of flatterers, though she deemed he had more sense</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than whispering foplings, or than witlings loud⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commenced<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1147" id="noteref-1147" epub:type="noteref">1147</a> (from such slight things will great commence)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To feel that flattery which attracts the proud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather by deference than compliment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And wins even by a delicate dissent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1148" id="noteref-1148" epub:type="noteref">1148</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then he had good looks;⁠—that point was carried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em><abbr>Nem. con.</abbr></em> amongst the women, which I grieve</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To say leads oft to <em><abbr>crim. con.</abbr></em> with the married⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A case which to the juries we may leave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since with digressions we too long have tarried.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Now though we know of old that looks deceive,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And always have done⁠—somehow these good looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Make more impression than the best of books.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aurora, who looked more on books than faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was very young, although so very sage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admiring more Minerva than the Graces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially upon a printed page.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Virtue’s self, with all her tightest laces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has not the natural stays of strict old age;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Socrates, that model of all duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Owned to a <em>penchant</em>, though discreet, for beauty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And girls of sixteen are thus far Socratic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But innocently so, as Socrates;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And really, if the Sage sublime and Attic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At seventy years had fantasies like these,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Plato in his dialogues dramatic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has shown, I know not why they should displease</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In virgins⁠—always in a modest way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Observe⁠—for that with me’s a <i xml:lang="la">sine quâ</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1149" id="noteref-1149" epub:type="noteref">1149</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Also observe, that, like the great Lord Coke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(See Littleton), whene’er I have expressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opinions two, which at first sight may look</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twin opposites, the second is the best.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps I have a third too, in a nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or none at all⁠—which seems a sorry jest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But if a writer should be quite consistent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How could he possibly show things existent?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If people contradict themselves, can I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Help contradicting them, and everybody,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even my veracious self?⁠—But that’s a lie:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I never did so, never will⁠—how should I?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He who doubts all things nothing can deny:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Truth’s fountains may be clear⁠—her streams are muddy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And cut through such canals of contradiction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she must often navigate o’er fiction.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Apologue, Fable, Poesy, and Parable,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are false, but may be rendered also true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By those who sow them in a land that’s arable:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis wonderful what Fable will not do!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis said it makes Reality more bearable:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what’s Reality? Who has its clue?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Philosophy? No; she too much rejects.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Religion? <em>Yes</em>; but which of all her sects?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some millions must be wrong, that’s pretty clear;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps it may turn out that all were right.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>God help us! Since we have need on our career</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To keep our holy beacons always bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis time that some new prophet should appear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or <em>old</em> indulge man with a second sight.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Opinions wear out in some thousand years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without a small refreshment from the spheres.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But here again, why will I thus entangle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Myself with Metaphysics? None can hate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much as I do any kind of wrangle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, such is my folly, or my fate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I always knock my head against some angle</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About the present, past, or future state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I wish well to Trojan and to Tyrian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For I was bred a moderate Presbyterian.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But though I am a temperate theologian,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also meek as a metaphysician,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Impartial between Tyrian and Trojan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Eldon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1150" id="noteref-1150" epub:type="noteref">1150</a> on a lunatic commission⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In politics my duty is to show John</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bull something of the lower world’s condition.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It makes my blood boil like the springs of Hecla,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1151" id="noteref-1151" epub:type="noteref">1151</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To see men let these scoundrel Sovereigns break law.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Politics, and Policy, and Piety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are topics which I sometimes introduce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not only for the sake of their variety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But as subservient to a moral use;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because my business is to <em>dress</em> society,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stuff with <em>sage</em> that very verdant goose.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, that we may furnish with some matter all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Tastes, we are going to try the Supernatural.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now I will give up all argument;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And positively, henceforth, no temptation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall “fool me to the top up of my bent:”⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1152" id="noteref-1152" epub:type="noteref">1152</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yes, I’ll begin a thorough reformation.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Indeed, I never knew what people meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By deeming that my Muse’s conversation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was dangerous;⁠—I think she is as harmless</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As some who labour more and yet may charm less.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Grim reader! did you ever see a ghost?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No; but you have heard⁠—I understand⁠—be dumb!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And don’t regret the time you may have lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For you have got that pleasure still to come:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And do not think I mean to sneer at most</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of these things, or by ridicule benumb</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That source of the Sublime and the Mysterious:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For certain reasons my belief is serious.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Serious? You laugh;⁠—you may: that will I not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My smiles must be sincere or not at all.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say I do believe a haunted spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exists⁠—and where? That shall I not recall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because I’d rather it should be forgot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Shadows the soul of Richard”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1153" id="noteref-1153" epub:type="noteref">1153</a> may appal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, upon that subject I’ve some qualms very</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like those of the philosopher of Malmsbury.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1154" id="noteref-1154" epub:type="noteref">1154</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The night⁠—(I sing by night⁠—sometimes an owl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now and then a nightingale)⁠—is dim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the loud shriek of sage Minerva’s fowl</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rattles around me her discordant hymn:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Old portraits from old walls upon me scowl⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wish to Heaven they would not look so grim;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dying embers dwindle in the grate⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think too that I have sat up too late:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore, though ’tis by no means my way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To rhyme at noon⁠—when I have other things</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To think of, if I ever think⁠—I say</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I feel some chilly midnight shudderings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prudently postpone, until mid-day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Treating a topic which, alas! but brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shadows;⁠—but you must be in my condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Before you learn to call this superstition.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-15-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Between two worlds Life hovers like a star,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twixt Night and Morn, upon the horizon’s verge.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How little do we know that which we are!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How less what we may be!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1155" id="noteref-1155" epub:type="noteref">1155</a> The eternal surge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Time and Tide rolls on and bears afar</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our bubbles; as the old burst, new emerge,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lashed from the foam of ages; while the graves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Empires heave but like some passing waves.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1156" id="noteref-1156" epub:type="noteref">1156</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
