<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-511" id="noteref-511" epub:type="noteref">511</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-6-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“There is a tide in the affairs of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which⁠—taken at the flood,”⁠—you know the rest,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-512" id="noteref-512" epub:type="noteref">512</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And most of us have found it now and then:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least we think so, though but few have guessed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moment, till too late to come again.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But no doubt everything is for the best⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which the surest sign is in the end:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When things are at the worst they sometimes mend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There is a tide in the affairs of women,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, taken at the flood, leads⁠—God knows where:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those navigators must be able seamen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose charts lay down its currents to a hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all the reveries of Jacob Behmen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-513" id="noteref-513" epub:type="noteref">513</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With its strange whirls and eddies can compare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men with their heads reflect on this and that⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But women with their hearts on Heaven knows what!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-514" id="noteref-514" epub:type="noteref">514</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And yet a headlong, headstrong, downright She,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Young, beautiful, and daring⁠—who would risk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A throne⁠—the world⁠—the universe⁠—to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beloved in her own way⁠—and rather whisk</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stars from out the sky, than not be free<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-515" id="noteref-515" epub:type="noteref">515</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As are the billows when the breeze is brisk⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though such a She’s a devil (if there be one),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet she would make full many a Manichean.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thrones, worlds, et cetera, are so oft upset</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By commonest ambition, that when Passion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’erthrows the same, we readily forget,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or at the least forgive, the loving rash one.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Anthony be well remembered yet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis not his conquests keep his name in fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Actium, lost for Cleopatra’s eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Outbalances all Caesar’s victories.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-516" id="noteref-516" epub:type="noteref">516</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He died at fifty for a queen of forty;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wish their years had been fifteen and twenty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-517" id="noteref-517" epub:type="noteref">517</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>For then wealth, kingdoms, worlds are but a sport⁠—I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remember when, though I had no great plenty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of worlds to lose, yet still, to pay my court, I</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave what I had⁠—a heart;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-518" id="noteref-518" epub:type="noteref">518</a> as the world went, I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave what was worth a world; for worlds could never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Restore me those pure feelings, gone for ever.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas the boy’s “mite,” and, like the “widow’s,” may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps be weighed hereafter, if not now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But whether such things do or do not weigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All who have loved, or love, will still allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life has nought like it. God is Love, they say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Love’s a god, or was before the brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Earth was wrinkled by the sins and tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of⁠—but Chronology best knows the years.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We left our hero and third heroine in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A kind of state more awkward than uncommon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For gentlemen must sometimes risk their skin</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For that sad tempter, a forbidden woman:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sultans too much abhor this sort of sin,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And don’t agree at all with the wise Roman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heroic, stoic Cato, the sententious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who lent his lady to his friend Hortensius.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-519" id="noteref-519" epub:type="noteref">519</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I know Gulbeyaz was extremely wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I own it, I deplore it, I condemn it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I detest all fiction even in song,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And so must tell the truth, howe’er you blame it.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her reason being weak, her passions strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She thought that her Lord’s heart (even could she claim it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was scarce enough; for he had fifty-nine</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Years, and a fifteen-hundredth concubine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I am not, like Cassio, “an arithmetician,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But by “the bookish theoric”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-520" id="noteref-520" epub:type="noteref">520</a> it appears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If ’tis summed up with feminine precision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That, adding to the account his Highness’ years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The fair Sultana erred from inanition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For, were the Sultan just to all his dears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She could but claim the fifteen-hundredth part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what should be monopoly⁠—the heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It is observed that ladies are litigious</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon all legal objects of possession,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not the least so when they are religious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which doubles what they think of the transgression:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With suits and prosecutions they besiege us,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As the tribunals show through many a session,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they suspect that any one goes shares</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that to which the law makes them sole heirs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now, if this holds good in a Christian land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The heathen also, though with lesser latitude,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-521" id="noteref-521" epub:type="noteref">521</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are apt to carry things with a high hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And take, what Kings call “an imposing attitude;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for their rights connubial make a stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When their liege husbands treat them with ingratitude;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And as four wives must have quadruple claims,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Tigris hath its jealousies like Thames.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gulbeyaz was the fourth, and (as I said)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The favourite; but what’s favour amongst four?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Polygamy may well be held in dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not only as a sin, but as a <em>bore</em>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most wise men with <em>one</em> moderate woman wed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-522" id="noteref-522" epub:type="noteref">522</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will scarcely find philosophy for more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all (except Muhammadans) forbear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make the nuptial couch a “Bed of Ware.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-523" id="noteref-523" epub:type="noteref">523</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His Highness, the sublimest of mankind⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-524" id="noteref-524" epub:type="noteref">524</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So styled according to the usual forms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of every monarch, till they are consigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To those sad hungry Jacobins the worms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who on the very loftiest kings have dined⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Highness gazed upon Gulbeyaz’ charms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expecting all the welcome of a lover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(A “Highland welcome”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-525" id="noteref-525" epub:type="noteref">525</a> all the wide world over).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now here we should distinguish; for howe’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kisses, sweet words, embraces, and all that,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May look like what it is⁠—neither here nor there,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-526" id="noteref-526" epub:type="noteref">526</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They are put on as easily as a hat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or rather bonnet, which the fair sex wear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Trimmed either heads or hearts to decorate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which form an ornament, but no more part</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of heads, than their caresses of the heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A slight blush, a soft tremor, a calm kind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gentle feminine delight, and shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More in the eyelids than the eyes, resigned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather to hide what pleases most unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are the best tokens (to a modest mind)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-527" id="noteref-527" epub:type="noteref">527</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Love, when seated on his loveliest throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sincere woman’s breast⁠—for over-<em>warm</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or over-<em>cold</em> annihilates the charm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For over-warmth, if false, is worse than truth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If true, ’tis no great lease of its own fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For no one, save in very early youth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would like (I think) to trust all to desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which is but a precarious bond, in sooth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And apt to be transferred to the first buyer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a sad discount: while your over chilly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Women, on t’ other hand, seem somewhat silly.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That is, we cannot pardon their bad taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For so it seems to lovers swift or slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who fain would have a mutual flame confessed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And see a sentimental passion glow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even were <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis’ paramour their guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In his monastic concubine of snow;⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-528" id="noteref-528" epub:type="noteref">528</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, the maxim for the amorous tribe is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horatian, “<i xml:lang="la">Medio tu tutissimus ibis.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-529" id="noteref-529" epub:type="noteref">529</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The “tu” ’s <em>too</em> much⁠—but let it stand⁠—the verse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Requires it, that’s to say, the English rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not the pink of old hexameters;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, after all, there’s neither tune nor time</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the last line, which cannot well be worse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-530" id="noteref-530" epub:type="noteref">530</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And was thrust in to close the octave’s chime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I own no prosody can ever rate it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As a rule, but <em>Truth</em> may, if you translate it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If fair Gulbeyaz overdid her part,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not⁠—it succeeded, and success</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is much in most things, not less in the heart</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than other articles of female dress.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Self-love in Man, too, beats all female art;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-531" id="noteref-531" epub:type="noteref">531</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They lie, we lie, all lie, but love no less:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And no one virtue yet, except starvation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could stop that worst of vices⁠—propagation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>We leave this royal couple to repose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A bed is not a throne, and they may sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whate’er their dreams be, if of joys or woes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet disappointed joys are woes as deep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As any man’s clay mixture undergoes.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our least of sorrows are such as we <em>weep</em>;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis the vile daily drop on drop which wears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The soul out (like the stone) with petty cares.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-532" id="noteref-532" epub:type="noteref">532</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A scolding wife, a sullen son, a bill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To pay, unpaid, protested, or discounted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At a per-centage; a child cross, dog ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A favourite horse fallen lame just as he’s mounted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bad old woman making a worse will,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-533" id="noteref-533" epub:type="noteref">533</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which leaves you minus of the cash you counted<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-534" id="noteref-534" epub:type="noteref">534</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As certain;⁠—these are paltry things, and yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve rarely seen the man they did not fret.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I’m a philosopher; confound them all!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-535" id="noteref-535" epub:type="noteref">535</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bills, beasts, and men, and⁠—no! <em>not</em> womankind!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-536" id="noteref-536" epub:type="noteref">536</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>With one good hearty curse I vent my gall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then my Stoicism leaves nought behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which it can either pain or evil call,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I can give my whole soul up to mind;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though what <em>is</em> soul, or mind, their birth or growth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is more than I know⁠—the deuce take them both!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-537" id="noteref-537" epub:type="noteref">537</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So now all things are damned one feels at ease,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As after reading Athanasius’ curse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which doth your true believer so much please:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I doubt if any now could make it worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er his worst enemy when at his knees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis so sententious, positive, and terse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And decorates the Book of Common Prayer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As doth a rainbow the just clearing air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gulbeyaz and her lord were sleeping, or</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least one of them!⁠—Oh, the heavy night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When wicked wives, who love some bachelor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-538" id="noteref-538" epub:type="noteref">538</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lie down in dudgeon to sigh for the light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the grey morning, and look vainly for</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its twinkle through the lattice dusky quite⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To toss, to tumble, doze, revive, and quake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lest their too lawful bed-fellow should wake!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-539" id="noteref-539" epub:type="noteref">539</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>These are beneath the canopy of heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Also beneath the canopy of beds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four-posted and silk-curtained, which are given</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For rich men and their brides to lay their heads</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon, in sheets white as what bards call “driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Snow,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-540" id="noteref-540" epub:type="noteref">540</a> Well! ’tis all hap-hazard when one weds.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gulbeyaz was an empress, but had been</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps as wretched if a <em>peasants quean</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan in his feminine disguise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-541" id="noteref-541" epub:type="noteref">541</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the damsels in their long array,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had bowed themselves before th’ imperial eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And at the usual signal ta’en their way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to their chambers, those long galleries</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the seraglio, where the ladies lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their delicate limbs; a thousand bosoms there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beating for Love, as the caged bird’s for air.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I love the sex, and sometimes would reverse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Tyrant’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-542" id="noteref-542" epub:type="noteref">542</a> wish, “that Mankind only had</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One neck, which he with one fell stroke might pierce:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My wish is quite as wide, but not so bad,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-543" id="noteref-543" epub:type="noteref">543</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And much more tender on the whole than fierce;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It being (not <em>now</em>, but only while a lad)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Womankind had but one rosy mouth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-544" id="noteref-544" epub:type="noteref">544</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To kiss them all at once from North to South.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh, enviable Briareus! with thy hands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heads, if thou hadst all things multiplied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In such proportion!⁠—But my Muse withstands</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The giant thought of being a Titan’s bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or travelling in Patagonian lands;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So let us back to Lilliput, and guide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our hero through the labyrinth of Love</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which we left him several lines above.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He went forth with the lovely Odalisques,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-545" id="noteref-545" epub:type="noteref">545</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At the given signal joined to their array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though he certainly ran many risks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet he could not at times keep, by the way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Although the consequences of such frisks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are worse than the worst damages men pay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In moral England, where the thing’s a tax,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From ogling all their charms from breasts to backs.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Still he forgot not his disguise:⁠—along</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The galleries from room to room they walked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A virgin-like and edifying throng,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By eunuchs flanked; while at their head there stalked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dame who kept up discipline among</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The female ranks, so that none stirred or talked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without her sanction on their she-parades:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her title was “the Mother of the Maids.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whether she was a “Mother,” I know not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or whether they were “Maids” who called her Mother;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But this is her Seraglio title, got</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not how, but good as any other;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So Cantemir<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-546" id="noteref-546" epub:type="noteref">546</a> can tell you, or De Tott:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-547" id="noteref-547" epub:type="noteref">547</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her office was to keep aloof or smother</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All bad propensities in fifteen hundred</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Young women, and correct them when they blundered.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A goodly sinecure, no doubt! but made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More easy by the absence of all men⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except his Majesty⁠—who, with her aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And guards, and bolts, and walls, and now and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A slight example, just to cast a shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the rest, contrived to keep this den</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beauties cool as an Italian convent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all the passions have, alas! but one vent.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And what is that? Devotion, doubtless⁠—how</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could you ask such a question?⁠—but we will</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Continue. As I said, this goodly row</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ladies of all countries at the will<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-548" id="noteref-548" epub:type="noteref">548</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of one good man, with stately march and slow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like water-lilies floating down a rill⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or rather lake⁠—for <em>rills</em> do <em>not</em> run <em>slowly</em>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Paced on most maiden-like and melancholy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But when they reached their own apartments, there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like birds, or boys, or bedlamites broke loose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waves at spring-tide, or women anywhere</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When freed from bonds (which are of no great use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After all), or like Irish at a fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their guards being gone, and as it were a truce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Established between them and bondage, they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to sing, dance, chatter, smile, and play.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their talk, of course, ran most on the new comer;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her shape, her hair, her air, her everything:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some thought her dress did not so much become her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or wondered at her ears without a ring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some said her years were getting nigh their summer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Others contended they were but in spring;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some thought her rather masculine in height,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While others wished that she had been so quite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But no one doubted on the whole, that she</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was what her dress bespoke, a damsel fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fresh, and “beautiful exceedingly,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-549" id="noteref-549" epub:type="noteref">549</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who with the brightest Georgians<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-550" id="noteref-550" epub:type="noteref">550</a> might compare:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wondered how Gulbeyaz, too, could be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So silly as to buy slaves who might share</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(If that his Highness wearied of his bride)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her Throne and Power, and everything beside.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what was strangest in this virgin crew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although her beauty was enough to vex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the first investigating view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They all found out as few, or fewer, specks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the fair form of their companion new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than is the custom of the gentle sex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they survey, with Christian eyes or Heathen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In a new face “the ugliest creature breathing.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And yet they had their little jealousies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like all the rest; but upon this occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether there are such things as sympathies</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without our knowledge or our approbation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although they could not see through his disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All felt a soft kind of concatenation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Magnetism, or Devilism, or what</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You please⁠—we will not quarrel about that:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But certain ’tis they all felt for their new</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Companion something newer still, as ’twere</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sentimental friendship through and through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Extremely pure, which made them all concur</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In wishing her their sister, save a few</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wished they had a brother just like her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom, if they were at home in sweet Circassia,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They would prefer to Padisha<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-551" id="noteref-551" epub:type="noteref">551</a> or Pacha.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of those who had most genius for this sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of sentimental friendship, there were three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lolah, Katinka,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-552" id="noteref-552" epub:type="noteref">552</a> and Dudù⁠—in short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(To save description), fair as fair can be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were they, according to the best report,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though differing in stature and degree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And clime and time, and country and complexion⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They all alike admired their new connection.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lolah was dusk as India and as warm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Katinka was a Georgian, white and red,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With great blue eyes, a lovely hand and arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And feet so small they scarce seemed made to tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rather skim the earth; while Dudù’s form</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looked more adapted to be put to bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Being somewhat large, and languishing, and lazy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet of a beauty that would drive you crazy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A kind of sleepy Venus seemed Dudù,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet very fit to “murder sleep”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-553" id="noteref-553" epub:type="noteref">553</a> in those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who gazed upon her cheek’s transcendent hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Attic forehead, and her Phidian nose:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few angles were there in her form, ’tis true,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thinner she might have been, and yet scarce lose;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, after all, ’t would puzzle to say where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It would not spoil some separate charm to <em>pare</em>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She was not violently lively, but</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stole on your spirit like a May-day breaking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes were not too sparkling, yet, half-shut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They put beholders in a tender taking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She looked (this simile’s quite new) just cut</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From marble, like Pygmalion’s statue waking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The mortal and the marble still at strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And timidly expanding into Life.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lolah demanded the new damsel’s name⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Juanna.”⁠—Well, a pretty name enough.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Katinka asked her also whence she came⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“From Spain.”⁠—“But where <em>is</em> Spain?”⁠—“Don’t ask such stuff,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor show your Georgian ignorance⁠—for shame!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Lolah, with an accent rather rough,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To poor Katinka: “Spain’s an island near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morocco, betwixt Egypt and Tangier.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dudù said nothing, but sat down beside</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juanna, playing with her veil or hair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, looking at her steadfastly, she sighed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she pitied her for being there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A pretty stranger without friend or guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And all abashed, too, at the general stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which welcomes hapless strangers in all places,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With kind remarks upon their mien and faces.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But here the Mother of the Maids drew near,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With “Ladies, it is time to go to rest.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’m puzzled what to do with <em>you</em>, my dear!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She added to Juanna, their new guest:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Your coming has been unexpected here,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And every couch is occupied; you had best</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Partake of mine; but by to-morrow early</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We will have all things settled for you fairly.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here Lolah interposed⁠—“Mamma, you know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You don’t sleep soundly, and I cannot bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That anybody should disturb you so;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’ll take Juanna; we’re a slenderer pair</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than you would make the half of;⁠—don’t say no;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I of your young charge will take due care.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here Katinka interfered, and said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“She also had compassion and a bed.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Besides, I hate to sleep alone,” quoth she.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The matron frowned: “Why so?”⁠—“For fear of ghosts,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied Katinka; “I am sure I see</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A phantom upon each of the four posts;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then I have the worst dreams that can be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Guebres, Giaours, and Ginns, and Gouls in hosts.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The dame replied, “Between your dreams and you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I fear Juanna’s dreams would be but few.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You, Lolah, must continue still to lie</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alone, for reasons which don’t matter; you</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same, Katinka, until by and by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I shall place Juanna with Dudù,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who’s quiet, inoffensive, silent, shy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And will not toss and chatter the night through.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What say you, child?”⁠—Dudù said nothing, as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her talents were of the more silent class;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But she rose up, and kissed the matron’s brow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between the eyes, and Lolah on both cheeks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Katinka too; and with a gentle bow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Curt’sies are neither used by Turks nor Greeks)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She took Juanna by the hand to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their place of rest, and left to both their piques,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The others pouting at the matron’s preference</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Dudù, though they held their tongues from deference.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was a spacious chamber (Oda is</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Turkish title), and ranged round the wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were couches, toilets⁠—and much more than this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I might describe, as I have seen it all,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But it suffices⁠—little was amiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas on the whole a nobly furnished hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all things ladies want, save one or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And even those were nearer than they knew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dudù, as has been said, was a sweet creature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not very dashing, but extremely winning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the most regulated charms of feature,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which painters cannot catch like faces sinning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against proportion⁠—the wild strokes of nature</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which they hit off at once in the beginning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Full of expression, right or wrong, that strike,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pleasing, or unpleasing, still are like.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But she was a soft landscape of mild earth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all was harmony, and calm, and quiet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Luxuriant, budding; cheerful without mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, if not happiness, is much more nigh it</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than are your mighty passions and so forth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, some call “the Sublime:” I wish they’d try it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve seen your stormy seas and stormy women,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pity lovers rather more than seamen.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But she was pensive more than melancholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And serious more than pensive, and serene,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It may be, more than either⁠—not unholy</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her thoughts, at least till now, appear to have been.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The strangest thing was, beauteous, she was wholly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unconscious, albeit turned of quick seventeen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That she was fair, or dark, or short, or tall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She never thought about herself at all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore was she kind and gentle as</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Age of Gold (when gold was yet unknown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which its nomenclature came to pass;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-554" id="noteref-554" epub:type="noteref">554</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thus most appropriately has been shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i xml:lang="la">Lucus à <em>non</em> lucendo</i>,” <em>not</em> what <em>was</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what <em>was not</em>; a sort of style that’s grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Extremely common in this age, whose metal</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Devil may decompose, but never settle:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-555" id="noteref-555" epub:type="noteref">555</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I think it may be of “Corinthian Brass,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-556" id="noteref-556" epub:type="noteref">556</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was a mixture of all metals, but</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The brazen uppermost). Kind reader! pass</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This long parenthesis: I could not shut</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It sooner for the soul of me, and class</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My faults even with your own! which meaneth, Put</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kind construction upon them and me:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <em>that</em> you won’t⁠—then don’t⁠—I am not less free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis time we should return to plain narration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus my narrative proceeds:⁠—Dudù,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With every kindness short of ostentation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Showed Juan, or Juanna, through and through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This labyrinth of females, and each station</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Described⁠—what’s strange⁠—in words extremely few:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have but one simile, and that’s a blunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For wordless woman, which is <em>silent</em> thunder.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-557" id="noteref-557" epub:type="noteref">557</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And next she gave her (I say <em>her</em>, because</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The gender still was epicene, at least</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In outward show, which is a saving clause)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An outline of the customs of the East,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all their chaste integrity of laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which the more a Harem is increased,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The stricter doubtless grow the vestal duties</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of any supernumerary beauties.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then she gave Juanna a chaste kiss:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dudú was fond of kissing⁠—which I’m sure</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That nobody can ever take amiss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because ’tis pleasant, so that it be pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And between females means no more than this⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That they have nothing better near, or newer.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Kiss” rhymes to “bliss” in fact as well as verse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish it never led to something worse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In perfect innocence she then unmade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her toilet, which cost little, for she was</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A child of Nature, carelessly arrayed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If fond of a chance ogle at her glass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas like the fawn, which, in the lake displayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beholds her own shy, shadowy image pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When first she starts, and then returns to peep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Admiring this new native of the deep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And one by one her articles of dress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were laid aside; but not before she offered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her aid to fair Juanna, whose excess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of modesty declined the assistance proffered:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which passed well off⁠—as she could do no less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though by this politesse she rather suffered,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pricking her fingers with those cursed pins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which surely were invented for our sins⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Making a woman like a porcupine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not to be rashly touched. But still more dread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh ye! whose fate it is, as once ’twas mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In early youth, to turn a lady’s maid;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I did my very boyish best to shine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In tricking her out for a masquerade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The pins were placed sufficiently, but not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stuck all exactly in the proper spot.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But these are foolish things to all the wise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I love Wisdom more than she loves me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My tendency is to philosophise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On most things, from a tyrant to a tree;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still the spouseless virgin <em>Knowledge</em> flies.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What are we? and whence came we? what shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our <em>ultimate</em> existence? what’s our present?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are questions answerless, and yet incessant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was deep silence in the chamber: dim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And distant from each other burned the lights,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And slumber hovered o’er each lovely limb</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the fair occupants: if there be sprites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They should have walked there in their sprightliest trim,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By way of change from their sepulchral sites,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And shown themselves as ghosts of better taste</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than haunting some old ruin or wild waste.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Many and beautiful lay those around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like flowers of different hue, and clime, and root,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some exotic garden sometimes found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With cost, and care, and warmth induced to shoot.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One with her auburn tresses lightly bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And fair brows gently drooping, as the fruit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nods from the tree, was slumbering with soft breath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lips apart, which showed the pearls beneath.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One with her flushed cheek laid on her white arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And raven ringlets gathered in dark crowd</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Above her brow, lay dreaming soft and warm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And smiling through her dream, as through a cloud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The moon breaks, half unveiled each further charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As, slightly stirring in her snowy shroud,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her beauties seized the unconscious hour of night</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All bashfully to struggle into light.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This is no bull, although it sounds so; for</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas night, but there were lamps, as hath been said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A third’s all pallid aspect offered more</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The traits of sleeping sorrow, and betrayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through the heaved breast the dream of some far shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Belovèd and deplored; while slowly strayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(As night-dew, on a cypress glittering, tinges</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The black bough) tear-drops through her eyes’ dark fringes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A fourth as marble, statue-like and still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lay in a breathless, hushed, and stony sleep;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>White, cold, and pure, as looks a frozen rill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or the snow minaret on an Alpine steep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Lot’s wife done in salt⁠—or what you will;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My similes are gathered in a heap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So pick and choose⁠—perhaps you’ll be content</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With a carved lady on a monument.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And lo! a fifth appears;⁠—and what is she?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lady of a “certain age,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-558" id="noteref-558" epub:type="noteref">558</a> which means</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Certainly agèd⁠—what her years might be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not, never counting past their teens;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there she slept, not quite so fair to see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ere that awful period intervenes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which lays both men and women on the shelf,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To meditate upon their sins and self.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But all this time how slept, or dreamed, Dudú?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With strict inquiry I could ne’er discover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scorn to add a syllable untrue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ere the middle watch was hardly over,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just when the fading lamps waned dim and blue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And phantoms hovered, or might seem to hover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To those who like their company, about</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The apartment, on a sudden she screamed out:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And that so loudly, that upstarted all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Oda, in a general commotion:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Matron and maids, and those whom you may call</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Neither, came crowding like the waves of Ocean,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One on the other, throughout the whole hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All trembling, wondering, without the least notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More than I have myself of what could make</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The calm Dudù so turbulently wake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But wide awake she was, and round her bed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With floating draperies and with flying hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With eager eyes, and light but hurried tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bosoms, arms, and ankles glancing bare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bright as any meteor ever bred</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By the North Pole⁠—they sought her cause of care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she seemed agitated, flushed, and frightened,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eye dilated, and her colour heightened.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what is strange⁠—and a strong proof how great</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A blessing is sound sleep⁠—Juanna lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As fast as ever husband by his mate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In holy matrimony snores away.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not all the clamour broke her happy state</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of slumber, ere they shook her⁠—so they say</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At least⁠—and then she, too, unclosed her eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yawned a good deal with discreet surprise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-559" id="noteref-559" epub:type="noteref">559</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now commenced a strict investigation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which, as all spoke at once, and more than once</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conjecturing, wondering, asking a narration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Alike might puzzle either wit or dunce</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To answer in a very clear oration.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dudú had never passed for wanting sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But being “no orator as Brutus is,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-560" id="noteref-560" epub:type="noteref">560</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could not at first expound what was amiss.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At length she said, that in a slumber sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She dreamed a dream, of walking in a wood⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A “wood obscure,” like that where Dante found<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-561" id="noteref-561" epub:type="noteref">561</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Himself in at the age when all grow good;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-562" id="noteref-562" epub:type="noteref">562</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Life’s half-way house, where dames with virtue crowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Run much less risk of lovers turning rude;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that this wood was full of pleasant fruits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trees of goodly growth and spreading roots;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And in the midst a golden apple grew⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A most prodigious pippin⁠—but it hung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather too high and distant; that she threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her glances on it, and then, longing, flung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stones and whatever she could pick up, to</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring down the fruit, which still perversely clung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To its own bough, and dangled yet in sight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But always at a most provoking height;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-563" id="noteref-563" epub:type="noteref">563</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That on a sudden, when she least had hope,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It fell down of its own accord before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her feet; that her first movement was to stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pick it up, and bite it to the core;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That just as her young lip began to ope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-564" id="noteref-564" epub:type="noteref">564</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the golden fruit the vision bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A bee flew out, and stung her to the heart,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And so⁠—she woke with a great scream and start.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All this she told with some confusion and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dismay, the usual consequence of dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the unpleasant kind, with none at hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To expound their vain and visionary gleams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I’ve known some odd ones which seemed really planned</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Prophetically, or that which one deems</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A “strange coincidence,” to use a phrase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By which such things are settled now-a-days.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-565" id="noteref-565" epub:type="noteref">565</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The damsels, who had thoughts of some great harm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Began, as is the consequence of fear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To scold a little at the false alarm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That broke for nothing on their sleeping ear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The matron, too, was wroth to leave her warm</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bed for the dream she had been obliged to hear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And chafed at poor Dudù, who only sighed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, that she was sorry she had cried.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I’ve heard of stories of a cock and bull;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But visions of an apple and a bee,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To take us from our natural rest, and pull</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The whole Oda from their beds at half-past three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would make us think the moon is at its full.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You surely are unwell, child! we must see,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow, what his Highness’s physician</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will say to this hysteric of a vision.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“And poor Juanna, too, the child’s first night</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within these walls, to be broke in upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With such a clamour⁠—I had thought it right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That the young stranger should not lie alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the quietest of all, she might</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With you, Dudù, a good night’s rest have known:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now I must transfer her to the charge</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Lolah⁠—though her couch is not so large.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lolah’s eyes sparkled at the proposition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But poor Dudù, with large drops in her own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resulting from the scolding or the vision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Implored that present pardon might be shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this first fault, and that on no condition</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(She added in a soft and piteous tone)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juanna should be taken from her, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her future dreams should be all kept in hand.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She promised never more to have a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least to dream so loudly as just now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She wondered at herself how she could scream⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas foolish, nervous, as she must allow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fond hallucination, and a theme</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For laughter⁠—but she felt her spirits low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And begged they would excuse her; she’d get over</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This weakness in a few hours, and recover.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And here Juanna kindly interposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And said she felt herself extremely well</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where she then was, as her sound sleep disclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all around rang like a tocsin bell;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did not find herself the least disposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To quit her gentle partner, and to dwell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Apart from one who had no sin to show,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save that of dreaming once “mal-à-propos.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As thus Juanna spoke, Dudù turned round</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hid her face within Juanna’s breast:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her neck alone was seen, but that was found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The colour of a budding rose’s crest.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-566" id="noteref-566" epub:type="noteref">566</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can’t tell why she blushed, nor can expound</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The mystery of this rupture of their rest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All that I know is, that the facts I state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are true as Truth has ever been of late,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And so good night to them⁠—or, if you will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Good morrow⁠—for the cock had crown, and light</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to clothe each Asiatic hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the mosque crescent struggled into sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the long caravan, which in the chill</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of dewy dawn wound slowly round each height</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That stretches to the stony belt, which girds</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Asia, where Kaff looks down upon the Kurds.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-567" id="noteref-567" epub:type="noteref">567</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With the first ray, or rather grey of morn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gulbeyaz rose from restlessness; and pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Passion rises, with its bosom worn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrayed herself with mantle, gem, and veil.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Nightingale that sings with the deep thorn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which fable places in her breast of wail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is lighter far of heart and voice than those</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose headlong passions form their proper woes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And that’s the moral of this composition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If people would but see its real drift;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But <em>that</em> they will not do without suspicion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because all gentle readers have the gift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of closing ’gainst the light their orbs of vision:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While gentle writers also love to lift</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their voices ’gainst each other, which is natural,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The numbers are too great for them to flatter all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Rose the Sultana from a bed of splendour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Softer than the soft Sybarite’s, who cried<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-568" id="noteref-568" epub:type="noteref">568</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aloud because his feelings were too tender</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To brook a ruffled rose-leaf by his side⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So beautiful that Art could little mend her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though pale with conflicts between Love and Pride;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So agitated was she with her error,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did not even look into the mirror.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Also arose about the self-same time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps a little later, her great Lord,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Master of thirty kingdoms so sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of a wife by whom he was abhorred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing of much less import in that clime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At least to those of incomes which afford</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The filling up their whole connubial cargo⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than where two wives are under an embargo.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He did not think much on the matter, nor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indeed on any other: as a man</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He liked to have a handsome paramour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At hand, as one may like to have a fan,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And therefore of Circassians had good store,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As an amusement after the Divan;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though an unusual fit of love, or duty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had made him lately bask in his bride’s beauty.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now he rose; and after due ablutions</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Exacted by the customs of the East,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And prayers and other pious evolutions,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He drank six cups of coffee at the least,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then withdrew to hear about the Russians,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose victories had recently increased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Catherine’s reign, whom Glory still adores,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As greatest of all sovereigns and w⁠⸺⁠s.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But oh, thou grand legitimate Alexander!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-569" id="noteref-569" epub:type="noteref">569</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-570" id="noteref-570" epub:type="noteref">570</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her son’s son, let not this last phrase offend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thine ear, if it should reach⁠—and now rhymes wander</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Almost as far as Petersburgh, and lend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dreadful impulse to each loud meander</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of murmuring Liberty’s wide waves, which blend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their roar even with the Baltic’s⁠—so you be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your father’s son, ’tis quite enough for me.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>To call men love-begotten, or proclaim<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-571" id="noteref-571" epub:type="noteref">571</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their mothers as the antipodes of Timon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That hater of Mankind, would be a shame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A libel, or whate’er you please to rhyme on:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But people’s ancestors are History’s game;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-572" id="noteref-572" epub:type="noteref">572</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if one Lady’s slip could leave a crime on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All generations, I should like to know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What pedigree the best would have to show?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-573" id="noteref-573" epub:type="noteref">573</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Had Catherine and the Sultan understood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their own true interests, which Kings rarely know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Until ’tis taught by lessons rather rude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There was a way to end their strife, although</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps precarious, had they but thought good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Without the aid of Prince or Plenipo:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She to dismiss her guards and he his Harem,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for their other matters, meet and share ’em.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But as it was, his Highness had to hold</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His daily council upon ways and means</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How to encounter with this martial scold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This modern Amazon and Queen of queans;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the perplexity could not be told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of all the pillars of the State, which leans</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes a little heavy on the backs</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those who cannot lay on a new tax.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime Gulbeyaz when her King was gone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Retired into her boudoir, a sweet place</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For love or breakfast; private, pleasing, lone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rich with all contrivances which grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those gay recesses:⁠—many a precious stone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sparkled along its roof, and many a vase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of porcelain held in the fettered flowers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those captive soothers of a captive’s hours.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Mother of pearl, and porphyry, and marble,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Vied with each other on this costly spot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And singing birds without were heard to warble;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And the stained glass which lighted this fair grot</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Varied each ray;⁠—but all descriptions garble</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The true effect,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-574" id="noteref-574" epub:type="noteref">574</a> and so we had better not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be too minute; an outline is the best⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lively reader’s fancy does the rest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And here she summoned Baba, and required</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Don Juan at his hands, and information</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what had passed since all the slaves retired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And whether he had occupied their station:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If matters had been managed as desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And his disguise with due consideration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kept up; and above all, the where and how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had passed the night, was what she wished to know.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Baba, with some embarrassment, replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To this long catechism of questions, asked</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More easily than answered⁠—that he had tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His best to obey in what he had been tasked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there seemed something that he wished to hide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which Hesitation more betrayed than masked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He scratched his ear, the infallible resource</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To which embarrassed people have recourse.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gulbeyaz was no model of true patience,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor much disposed to wait in word or deed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She liked quick answers in all conversations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when she saw him stumbling like a steed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In his replies, she puzzled him for fresh ones;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as his speech grew still more broken-kneed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her cheek began to flush, her eyes to sparkle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her proud brow’s blue veins to swell and darkle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Baba saw these symptoms, which he knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To bode him no great good, he deprecated</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her anger, and beseeched she’d hear him through⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He could not help the thing which he related:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then out it came at length, that to Dudù</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan was given in charge, as hath been stated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not by Baba’s fault, he said, and swore on</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The holy camel’s hump, besides the Koran.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The chief dame of the Oda,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-575" id="noteref-575" epub:type="noteref">575</a> upon whom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The discipline of the whole Harem bore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As soon as they re-entered their own room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Baba’s function stopped short at the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had settled all; nor could he then presume</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(The aforesaid Baba) just then to do more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without exciting such suspicion as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might make the matter still worse than it was.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He hoped, indeed he thought, he could be sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan had not betrayed himself; in fact</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas certain that his conduct had been pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because a foolish or imprudent act</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would not alone have made him insecure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But ended in his being found out and <em>sacked</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thrown into the sea.⁠—Thus Baba spoke</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all save Dudù’s dream, which was no joke.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This he discreetly kept in the back ground,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And talked away⁠—and might have talked till now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any further answer that he found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So deep an anguish wrung Gulbeyaz’ brow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her cheek turned ashes, ears rung, brain whirled round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she had received a sudden blow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the heart’s dew of pain sprang fast and chilly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er her fair front, like Morning’s on a lily.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Although she was not of the fainting sort,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Baba thought she would faint, but there he erred⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was but a convulsion, which though short</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can never be described; we all have heard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-576" id="noteref-576" epub:type="noteref">576</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And some of us have felt thus “all amort”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-577" id="noteref-577" epub:type="noteref">577</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When things beyond the common have occurred;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gulbeyaz proved in that brief agony</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What she could ne’er express⁠—then how should I?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She stood a moment as a Pythoness</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stands on her tripod, agonized, and full</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of inspiration gathered from distress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all the heart-strings like wild horses pull</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The heart asunder;⁠—then, as more or less</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their speed abated or their strength grew dull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She sunk down on her seat by slow degrees,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And bowed her throbbing head o’er trembling knees.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her face declined and was unseen; her hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fell in long tresses like the weeping willow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sweeping the marble underneath her chair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or rather sofa (for it was all pillow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A low, soft ottoman), and black Despair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Stirred up and down her bosom like a billow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which rushes to some shore whose shingles check</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its farther course, but must receive its wreck.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her head hung down, and her long hair in stooping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Concealed her features better than a veil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one hand o’er the ottoman lay drooping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">White, waxen, and as alabaster pale:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would that I were a painter! to be grouping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All that a poet drags into detail!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh that my words were colours! but their tints</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May serve perhaps as outlines or slight hints.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Baba, who knew by experience when to talk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when to hold his tongue, now held it till</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This passion might blow o’er, nor dared to balk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gulbeyaz’ taciturn or speaking will.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length she rose up, and began to walk</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Slowly along the room, but silent still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And her brow cleared, but not her troubled eye;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wind was down, but still the sea ran high.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She stopped, and raised her head to speak⁠—but paused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then moved on again with rapid pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then slackened it, which is the march most caused</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By deep emotion:⁠—you may sometimes trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A feeling in each footstep, as disclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By Sallust in his Catiline, who, chased</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By all the demons of all passions, showed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their work even by the way in which he trode.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-578" id="noteref-578" epub:type="noteref">578</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-112">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gulbeyaz stopped and beckoned Baba:⁠—“Slave!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bring the two slaves!” she said in a low tone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But one which Baba did not like to brave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet he shuddered, and seemed rather prone</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove reluctant, and begged leave to crave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Though he well knew the meaning) to be shown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What slaves her Highness wished to indicate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear of any error, like the late.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-113">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The Georgian and her paramour,” replied</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Imperial Bride⁠—and added, “Let the boat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be ready by the secret portal’s side:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You know the rest.” The words stuck in her throat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Despite her injured love and fiery pride;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And of this Baba willingly took note,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And begged by every hair of Muhammad’s beard,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She would revoke the order he had heard.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-114">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To hear is to obey,” he said; “but still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sultana, think upon the consequence:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It is not that I shall not all fulfil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your orders, even in their severest sense;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such precipitation may end ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even at your own imperative expense:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not mean destruction and exposure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In case of any premature disclosure;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-115">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But your own feelings. Even should all the rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be hidden by the rolling waves, which hide</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Already many a once love-beaten breast</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deep in the caverns of the deadly tide⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You love this boyish, new, Seraglio guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And if this violent remedy be tried⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excuse my freedom, when I here assure you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That killing him is not the way to cure you.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-116">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“What dost thou know of Love or feeling?⁠—Wretch!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Begone!” she cried, with kindling eyes⁠—“and do</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My bidding!” Baba vanished, for to stretch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His own remonstrance further he well knew</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might end in acting as his own “Jack Ketch;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though he wished extremely to get through</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This awkward business without harm to others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He still preferred his own neck to another’s.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-117">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Away he went then upon his commission,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Growling and grumbling in good Turkish phrase</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Against all women of whate’er condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially Sultanas and their ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their obstinacy, pride, and indecision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their never knowing their own mind two days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trouble that they gave, their immorality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which made him daily bless his own neutrality.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-118">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then he called his brethren to his aid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sent one on a summons to the pair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That they must instantly be well arrayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And above all be combed even to a hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And brought before the Empress, who had made</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inquiries after them with kindest care:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At which Dudù looked strange, and Juan silly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But go they must at once, and will I⁠—nill I.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-119">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And here I leave them at their preparation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the imperial presence, wherein whether</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gulbeyaz showed them both commiseration,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or got rid of the parties altogether,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like other angry ladies of her nation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are things the turning of a hair or feather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May settle; but far be ’t from me to anticipate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In what way feminine caprice may dissipate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-6-120">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I leave them for the present with good wishes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though doubts of their well doing, to arrange</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Another part of History; for the dishes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of this our banquet we must sometimes change;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And trusting Juan may escape the fishes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Although his situation now seems strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And scarce secure)⁠—as such digressions <em>are</em> fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Muse will take a little touch at warfare.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<footer>
				<p>End of Canto 6th. <time datetime="1822">1822</time>.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
