<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</span>
				<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-16-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The antique Persians taught three useful things,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To draw the bow, to ride, and speak the truth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>This was the mode of Cyrus, best of kings⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mode adopted since by modern youth.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bows have they, generally with two strings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Horses they ride without remorse or ruth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At speaking truth perhaps they are less clever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But draw the long bow better now than ever.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The cause of this effect, or this defect⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“For this effect defective comes by cause,”⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is what I have not leisure to inspect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But this I must say in my own applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the Muses that I recollect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er may be her follies or her flaws</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In some things, mine’s beyond all contradiction</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most sincere that ever dealt in fiction.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And as she treats all things, and ne’er retreats</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From anything, this Epic will contain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wilderness of the most rare conceits,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which you might elsewhere hope to find in vain.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true there be some bitters with the sweets,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet mixed so slightly, that you can’t complain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wonder they so few are, since my tale is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“<i>De rebus cunctis et quibusdam aliis.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But of all truths which she has told, the most</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">True is that which she is about to tell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I said it was a story of a ghost⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What then? I only know it so befell.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have you explored the limits of the coast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all the dwellers of the earth must dwell?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis time to strike such puny doubters dumb as</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sceptics who would not believe Columbus.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some people would impose now with authority,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turpin’s or Monmouth Geoffry’s Chronicle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men whose historical superiority</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is always greatest at a miracle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Saint Augustine has the great priority,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who bids all men believe the impossible,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>Because ’tis so.</i> Who nibble, scribble, quibble, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quiets at once with “<i>quia impossibile.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore, mortals, cavil not at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Believe:⁠—if ’tis improbable, you <i>must</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if it is impossible, you <i>shall</i>:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis always best to take things upon trust.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I do not speak profanely to recall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those holier Mysteries which the wise and just</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receive as Gospel, and which grow more rooted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As all truths must, the more they are disputed:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I merely mean to say what Johnson said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That in the course of some six thousand years,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All nations have believed that from the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A visitant at intervals appears:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what is strangest upon this strange head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is, that whatever bar the reason rears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst such belief, there’s something stronger still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In its behalf⁠—let those deny who will.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The dinner and the <i>soirée</i> too were done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The supper too discussed, the dames admired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The banqueteers had dropped off one by one⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The song was silent, and the dance expired:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last thin petticoats were vanished, gone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like fleecy clouds into the sky retired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And nothing brighter gleamed through the saloon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than dying tapers⁠—and the peeping moon.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The evaporation of a joyous day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is like the last glass of champagne, without</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foam which made its virgin bumper gay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or like a system coupled with a doubt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like a soda bottle when its spray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has sparkled and let half its spirit out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or like a billow left by storms behind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without the animation of the wind;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Or like an opiate, which brings troubled rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or none; or like⁠—like nothing that I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except itself;⁠—such is the human breast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thing, of which similitudes can show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No real likeness⁠—like the old Tyrian vest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dyed purple, none at present can tell how,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If from a shell-fish or from cochineal.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So perish every Tyrant’s robe piece-meal!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But next to dressing for a rout or ball,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Undressing is a woe; our <i>robe de chambre</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span>May sit like that of Nessus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and recall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Thoughts quite as yellow, but less clear than amber.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Titus exclaimed, “I’ve lost a day!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> Of all</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The nights and days most people can remember,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I have had of both, some not to be disdained,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish they’d state how many they have gained.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Juan, on retiring for the night,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Felt restless, and perplexed, and compromised:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He thought Aurora Raby’s eyes more bright</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than Adeline (such is advice) advised;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he had known exactly his own plight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He probably would have philosophised:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A great resource to all, and ne’er denied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till wanted; therefore Juan only sighed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He sighed;⁠—the next resource is the full moon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where all sighs are deposited; and now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It happened luckily, the chaste orb shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As clear as such a climate will allow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Juan’s mind was in the proper tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To hail her with the apostrophe⁠—“O thou!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of amatory egotism the <i>Tuism</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which further to explain would be a truism.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Lover, Poet, or Astronomer⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shepherd, or swain⁠—whoever may behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Feel some abstraction when they gaze on her;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great thoughts we catch from thence (besides a cold</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sometimes, unless my feelings rather err);</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deep secrets to her rolling light are told;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ocean’s tides and mortals’ brains she sways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also hearts⁠—if there be truth in lays.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan felt somewhat pensive, and disposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For contemplation rather than his pillow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Gothic chamber, where he was enclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Let in the rippling sound of the lake’s billow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all the mystery by midnight caused:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below his window waved (of course) willow;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he stood gazing out on the cascade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That flashed and after darkened in the shade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Upon his table or his toilet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—<i>which</i></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of these is not exactly ascertained⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(I state this, for I am cautious to a pitch</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of nicety, where a fact is to be gained,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A lamp burned high, while he leant from a niche,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where many a Gothic ornament remained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In chiselled stone and painted glass, and all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Time has left our fathers of their Hall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then, as the night was clear though cold, he threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His chamber door wide open<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—and went forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a gallery of a sombre hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long, furnished with old pictures of great worth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of knights and dames heroic and chaste too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As doubtless should be people of high birth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But by dim lights the portraits of the dead</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have something ghastly, desolate, and dread.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The forms of the grim Knight and pictured Saint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Look living in the moon; and as you turn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Backward and forward to the echoes faint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of your own footsteps⁠—voices from the Urn</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Appear to wake, and shadows wild and quaint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Start from the frames which fence their aspects stern,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if to ask how you can dare to keep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A vigil there, where all but Death should sleep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And the pale smile of Beauties in the grave,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The charms of other days, in starlight gleams,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glimmer on high; their buried locks still wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Along the canvas; their eyes glance like dreams</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On ours, or spars within some dusky cave,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Death is imaged in their shadowy beams.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A picture is the past; even ere its frame</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be gilt, who sate hath ceased to be the same.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As Juan mused on Mutability,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or on his Mistress⁠—terms synonymous⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No sound except the echo of his sigh</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or step ran sadly through that antique house;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When suddenly he heard, or thought so, nigh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A supernatural agent⁠—or a mouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose little nibbling rustle will embarrass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most people as it plays along the arras.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was no mouse⁠—but lo! a monk, arrayed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In cowl and beads, and dusky garb, appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now in the moonlight, and now lapsed in shade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With steps that trod as heavy, yet unheard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His garments only a slight murmur made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He moved as shadowy as the Sisters weird,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>But slowly; and as he passed Juan by,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Glanced, without pausing, on him a bright eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan was petrified; he had heard a hint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of such a Spirit in these halls of old,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But thought, like most men, that there was nothing in’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beyond the rumour which such spots unfold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Coined from surviving Superstition’s mint,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which passes ghosts in currency like gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But rarely seen, like gold compared with paper.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And did he see this? or was it a vapour?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Once, twice, thrice passed, repassed⁠—the thing of air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or earth beneath, or Heaven, or t’ other place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Juan gazed upon it with a stare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet could not speak or move; but, on its base</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As stands a statue, stood: he felt his hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twine like a knot of snakes around his face;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He taxed his tongue for words, which were not granted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ask the reverend person what he wanted.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The third time, after a still longer pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shadow passed away⁠—but where? the hall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was long, and thus far there was no great cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To think his vanishing unnatural:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Doors there were many, through which, by the laws</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of physics, bodies whether short or tall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might come or go; but Juan could not state</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through which the Spectre seemed to evaporate.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He stood⁠—how long he knew not, but it seemed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">An age⁠—expectant, powerless, with his eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Strained on the spot where first the figure gleamed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Then by degrees recalled his energies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And would have passed the whole off as a dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But could not wake; he was, he did surmise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Waking already, and returned at length</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back to his chamber, shorn of half his strength.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All there was as he left it: still his taper</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burned, and not <i>blue</i>, as modest tapers use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receiving sprites with sympathetic vapour;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He rubbed his eyes, and they did not refuse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their office: he took up an old newspaper;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The paper was right easy to peruse;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He read an article the King attacking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a long eulogy of “Patent Blacking.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This savoured of this world; but his hand shook:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He shut his door, and after having read</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A paragraph, I think about Horne Tooke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Undressed, and rather slowly went to bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There, couched all snugly on his pillow’s nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With what he had seen his phantasy he fed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And though it was no opiate, slumber crept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Upon him by degrees, and so he slept.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He woke betimes; and, as may be supposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pondered upon his visitant or vision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And whether it ought not to be disclosed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At risk of being quizzed for superstition.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The more he thought, the more his mind was posed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In the mean time, his valet, whose precision</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was great, because his master brooked no less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Knocked to inform him it was time to dress.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He dressed; and like young people he was wont</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To take some trouble with his toilet, but</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This morning rather spent less time upon’t;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Aside his very mirror soon was put;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His curls fell negligently o’er his front,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His clothes were not curbed to their usual cut,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His very neckcloth’s Gordian knot was tied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Almost an hair’s breadth too much on one side.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And when he walked down into the Saloon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sate him pensive o’er a dish of tea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which he perhaps had not discovered soon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had it not happened scalding hot to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which made him have recourse unto his spoon;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much <i>distrait</i> he was, that all could see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That something was the matter⁠—Adeline</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The first⁠—but <i>what</i> she could not well divine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She looked, and saw him pale, and turned as pale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Herself; then hastily looked down, and muttered</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something, but what’s not stated in my tale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lord Henry said, his muffin was ill buttered;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Duchess of Fitz-Fulke played with her veil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looked at Juan hard, but nothing uttered.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora Raby with her large dark eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Surveyed him with a kind of calm surprise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But seeing him all cold and silent still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And everybody wondering more or less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fair Adeline inquired, “If he were ill?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He started, and said, “Yes⁠—no⁠—rather⁠—yes.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The family physician had great skill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And being present, now began to express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His readiness to feel his pulse and tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause, but Juan said, he was “quite well.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Quite well; yes⁠—no.”⁠—These answers were mysterious,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet his looks appeared to sanction both,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>However they might savour of delirious;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Something like illness of a sudden growth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Weighed on his spirit, though by no means serious:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But for the rest, as he himself seemed both</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To state the case, it might be ta’en for granted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was not the physician that he wanted.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord Henry, who had now discussed his chocolate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Also the muffin whereof he complained,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said, Juan had not got his usual look elate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which he marvelled, since it had not rained;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then asked her Grace what news were of the Duke of late?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><i>Her</i> Grace replied, <i>his</i> Grace was rather pained</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With some slight, light, hereditary twinges</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gout, which rusts aristocratic hinges.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Then Henry turned to Juan, and addressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A few words of condolence on his state:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“You look,” quoth he, “as if you had had your rest</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke in upon by the Black Friar of late.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What Friar?” said Juan; and he did his best</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To put the question with an air sedate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or careless; but the effort was not valid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hinder him from growing still more pallid.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Oh! have you never heard of the Black Friar?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Spirit of these walls?”⁠—“In truth not I.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Why Fame⁠—but Fame you know’s sometimes a liar⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tells an odd story, of which by and by:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whether with time the Spectre has grown shyer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or that our Sires had a more gifted eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For such sights, though the tale is half believed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Friar of late has not been oft perceived.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“The last time was⁠—”⁠—“I pray,” said Adeline⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Who watched the changes of Don Juan’s brow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And from its context thought she could divine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Connections stronger than he chose to avow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With this same legend)⁠—“if you but design</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To jest, you’ll choose some other theme just now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because the present tale has oft been told,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And is not much improved by growing old.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Jest!” quoth Milor; “why, Adeline, you know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That we ourselves⁠—’twas in the honey moon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw⁠—”⁠—“Well, no matter, ’twas so long ago;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But, come, I’ll set your story to a tune.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Graceful as Dian when she draws her bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She seized her harp, whose strings were kindled soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As touched, and plaintively began to play</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The air of “ ’Twas a Friar of Orders Gray.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But add the words,” cried Henry, “which you made;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Adeline is half a poetess,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning round to the rest, he smiling said.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of course the others could not but express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In courtesy their wish to see displayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By one <i>three</i> talents, for there were no less⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The voice, the words, the harper’s skill, at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could hardly be united by a dunce.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>After some fascinating hesitation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The charming of these charmers, who seem bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can’t tell why, to this dissimulation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fair Adeline, with eyes fixed on the ground</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At first, then kindling into animation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Added her sweet voice to the lyric sound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And sang with much simplicity⁠—a merit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not the less precious, that we seldom hear it.</span>
				</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">1</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Beware! beware! of the Black Friar,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Who sitteth by Norman stone,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For he mutters his prayer in the midnight air,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And his mass of the days that are gone.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>When the Lord of the Hill, Amundeville,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Made Norman Church his prey,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And expelled the friars, one friar still</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Would not be driven away.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">2</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Though he came in his might, with King Henry’s right,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">To turn church lands to lay,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With sword in hand, and torch to light</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Their walls, if they said nay;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A monk remained, unchased, unchained,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And he did not seem formed of clay,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For he’s seen in the porch, and he’s seen in the church,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though he is not seen by day.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">3</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>And whether for good, or whether for ill,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">It is not mine to say;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But still with the house of Amundeville</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">He abideth night and day.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By the marriage-bed of their lords, ’tis said,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">He flits on the bridal eve;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And ’tis held as faith, to their bed of Death<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
							<br/>
							<span>He comes⁠—but not to grieve.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">4</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>When an heir is born, he’s heard to mourn,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And when aught is to befall</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That ancient line, in the pale moonshine</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">He walks from hall to hall.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His form you may trace, but not his face,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">’Tis shadowed by his cowl;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But his eyes may be seen from the folds between,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And they seem of a parted soul.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">5</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>But beware! beware! of the Black Friar,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">He still retains his sway,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For he is yet the Church’s heir,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Whoever may be the lay.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Amundeville is Lord by day,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">But the monk is Lord by night;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nor wine nor wassail could raise a vassal</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To question that Friar’s right.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
					<div>
						<header>
							<p epub:type="ordinal">6</p>
						</header>
						<p>
							<span>Say nought to him as he walks the Hall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And he’ll say nought to you;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He sweeps along in his dusky pall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">As o’er the grass the dew.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then grammercy! for the Black Friar;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Heaven sain him! fair or foul⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And whatsoe’er may be his prayer,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Let ours be for his soul.</span>
						</p>
					</div>
				</blockquote>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The lady’s voice ceased, and the thrilling wires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Died from the touch that kindled them to sound;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the pause followed, which when song expires</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pervades a moment those who listen round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then of course the circle much admires,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor less applauds, as in politeness bound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The tones, the feeling, and the execution,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the performer’s diffident confusion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Fair Adeline, though in a careless way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if she rated such accomplishment</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As the mere pastime of an idle day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pursued an instant for her own content,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would now and then as ’twere <i>without</i> display,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet <i>with</i> display in fact, at times relent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such performances with haughty smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To show she <i>could</i>, if it were worth her while.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now this (but we will whisper it aside)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was⁠—pardon the pedantic illustration⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trampling on Plato’s pride with greater pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As did the Cynic on some like occasion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Deeming the sage would be much mortified,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thrown into a philosophic passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For a spoilt carpet⁠—but the “Attic Bee”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was much consoled by his own repartee.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus Adeline would throw into the shade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(By doing easily, whene’er she chose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What dilettanti do with vast parade)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their sort of <i>half profession</i>; for it grows</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To something like this when too oft displayed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that it is so, everybody knows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who have heard Miss That or This, or Lady T’other,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Show off⁠—to please their company or mother.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Oh! the long evenings of duets and trios!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The admirations and the speculations;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The “Mamma Mia’s!” and the “Amor Mio’s!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The “Tanti palpiti’s” on such occasions:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The “Lasciami’s,” and quavering “Addio’s,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Amongst our own most musical of nations!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With “Tu mi chamas’s” from Portingale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To soothe our ears, lest Italy should fail.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In Babylon’s <i>bravuras</i>⁠—as the Home-</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heart-Ballads of Green Erin or Grey Highlands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That bring Lochaber back to eyes that roam</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er far Atlantic continents or islands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The calentures<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> of music which o’ercome</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">All mountaineers with dreams that they are nigh lands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more to be beheld but in such visions⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was Adeline well versed, as compositions.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She also had a twilight tinge of “<i>Blue</i>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could write rhymes, and compose more than she wrote,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made epigrams occasionally too</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon her friends, as everybody ought.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But still from that sublimer azure hue,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much the present dye, she was remote;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was weak enough to deem Pope a great poet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what was worse, was not ashamed to show it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Aurora⁠—since we are touching upon taste,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which now-a-days is the thermometer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By whose degrees all characters are classed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was more Shakespearian, if I do not err.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The worlds beyond this World’s perplexing waste</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had more of her existence, for in her</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a depth of feeling to embrace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thoughts, boundless, deep, but silent too as Space.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Not so her gracious, graceful, graceless Grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The full-grown Hebe of Fitz-Fulke, whose mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If she had any, was upon her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And that was of a fascinating kind.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A little turn for mischief you might trace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Also thereon⁠—but that’s not much; we find</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Few females without some such gentle leaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For fear we should suppose us quite in Heaven.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have not heard she was at all poetic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though once she was seen reading the <i>Bath Guide</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Hayley’s <i>Triumphs</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> which she deemed pathetic,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because she said <i>her temper</i> had been tried</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So much, the bard had really been prophetic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of what she had gone through with⁠—since a bride.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But of all verse, what most ensured her praise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were sonnets to herself, or <i>bouts rimés</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twere difficult to say what was the object</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Adeline, in bringing this same lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To bear on what appeared to her the subject</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Juan’s nervous feelings on that day.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps she merely had the simple project</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To laugh him out of his supposed dismay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps she might wish to confirm him in it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though why I cannot say⁠—at least this minute.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But so far the immediate effect</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was to restore him to his self-propriety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing quite necessary to the elect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wish to take the tone of their society:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which you cannot be too circumspect,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whether the mode be persiflage or piety,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But wear the newest mantle of hypocrisy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On pain of much displeasing the gynocracy.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And therefore Juan now began to rally</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His spirits, and without more explanation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To jest upon such themes in many a sally.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her Grace, too, also seized the same occasion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With various similar remarks to tally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But wished for a still more detailed narration</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of this same mystic friar’s curious doings,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the present family’s deaths and wooings.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of these few could say more than has been said;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They passed as such things do, for superstition</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With some, while others, who had more in dread</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The theme, half credited the strange tradition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And much was talked on all sides on that head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Juan, when cross-questioned on the vision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which some supposed (though he had not avowed it)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had stirred him, answered in a way to cloud it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then, the mid-day having worn to one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The company prepared to separate;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some to their several pastimes, or to none,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some wondering ’twas so early, some so late.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a goodly match too, to be run</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Between some greyhounds on my Lord’s estate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a young race-horse of old pedigree,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Matched for the spring, whom several went to see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was a picture-dealer who had brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A special Titian, warranted original,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So precious that it was not to be bought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though Princes the possessor were besieging all⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The King himself had cheapened it, but thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The civil list he deigns to accept (obliging all</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His subjects by his gracious acceptation)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Too scanty, in these times of low taxation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But as Lord Henry was a connoisseur⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The friend of Artists, if not Arts⁠—the owner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With motives the most classical and pure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that he would have been the very donor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather than seller, had his wants been fewer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So much he deemed his patronage an honour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had brought the <i>capo d’opera</i>, not for sale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But for his judgment⁠—never known to fail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There was a modern Goth, I mean a Gothic</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bricklayer of Babel, called an architect,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brought to survey these grey walls which, though so thick,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Might have from Time acquired some slight defect;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who, after rummaging the Abbey through thick</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thin, produced a plan whereby to erect</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New buildings of correctest conformation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And throw down old⁠—which he called <i>restoration</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The cost would be a trifle⁠—an “old song,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Set to some thousands (’tis the usual burden</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of that same tune, when people hum it long)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The price would speedily repay its worth in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An edifice no less sublime than strong,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By which Lord Henry’s good taste would go forth in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its glory, through all ages shining sunny,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Gothic daring shown in English money.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There were two lawyers busy on a mortgage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lord Henry wished to raise for a new purchase;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Also a lawsuit upon tenures burgage,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And one on tithes, which sure as Discord’s torches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Kindling Religion till she throws down <i>her</i> gage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Untying” squires “to fight against the churches;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a prize ox, a prize pig, and ploughman,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Henry was a sort of Sabine showman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There were two poachers caught in a steel trap,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ready for gaol, their place of convalescence;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a country girl in a close cap</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And scarlet cloak (I hate the sight to see, since⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since⁠—since⁠—in youth, I had the sad mishap⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But luckily I have paid few parish fees since):<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>That scarlet cloak, alas! unclosed with rigour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Presents the problem of a double figure.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A reel within a bottle is a mystery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One can’t tell how it e’er got in or out;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Therefore the present piece of natural history</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I leave to those who are fond of solving doubt;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merely state, though not for the Consistory,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lord Henry was a Justice, and that Scout</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The constable, beneath a warrant’s banner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had bagged this poacher upon Nature’s manor.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Now Justices of Peace must judge all pieces</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of mischief of all kinds, and keep the game</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And morals of the country from caprices</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of those who have not a licence for the same;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of all things, excepting tithes and leases,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps these are most difficult to tame:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Preserving partridges and pretty wenches</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are puzzles to the most precautious benches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The present culprit was extremely pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Pale as if painted so; her cheek being red</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By nature, as in higher dames less hale</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis white, at least when they just rise from bed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps she was ashamed of seeming frail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor soul! for she was country born and bred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And knew no better in her immorality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than to wax white⁠—for blushes are for quality.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her black, bright, downcast, yet <i>espiègle</i> eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had gathered a large tear into its corner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which the poor thing at times essayed to dry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For she was not a sentimental mourner</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Parading all her sensibility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor insolent enough to scorn the scorner,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But stood in trembling, patient tribulation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be called up for her examination.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Of course these groups were scattered here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not nigh the gay saloon of ladies gent.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lawyers in the study; and in air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The prize pig, ploughman, poachers: the men sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From town, viz. architect and dealer, were</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Both busy (as a General in his tent</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Writing despatches) in their several stations,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Exulting in their brilliant lucubrations.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But this poor girl was left in the great hall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While Scout, the parish guardian of the frail,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Discussed (he hated beer yclept the “small”)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A mighty mug of <i>moral</i> double ale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She waited until Justice could recall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Its kind attentions to their proper pale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To name a thing in nomenclature rather<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perplexing for most virgins⁠—a child’s father.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>You see here was enough of occupation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the Lord Henry, linked with dogs and horses.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was much bustle too, and preparation</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Below stairs on the score of second courses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because, as suits their rank and situation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those who in counties have great land resources</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have “public days,” when all men may carouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though not exactly what’s called “open house.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But once a week or fortnight, <i>un</i>invited</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Thus we translate a <i>general invitation</i>)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All country gentlemen, esquired or knighted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">May drop in without cards, and take their station</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At the full board, and sit alike delighted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With fashionable wines and conversation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, as the isthmus of the grand connection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Talk o’er themselves the past and next election.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Lord Henry was a great electioneerer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Burrowing for boroughs like a rat or rabbit.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But county contests cost him rather dearer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Because the neighbouring Scotch Earl of Giftgabbit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had English influence, in the self-same sphere here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His son, the Honourable Dick Dicedrabbit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was member for the “other interest” (meaning</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The same self-interest, with a different leaning).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Courteous and cautious therefore in his county,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was all things to all men, and dispensed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some civility, to others bounty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And promises to all⁠—which last commenced</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gather to a somewhat large amount, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not calculating how much they condensed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But what with keeping some, and breaking others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His word had the same value as another’s.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A friend to Freedom and freeholders⁠—yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No less a friend to Government⁠—he held,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That he exactly the just medium hit</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Twixt Place and Patriotism⁠—albeit compelled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such was his Sovereign’s pleasure, (though unfit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He added modestly, when rebels railed,)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hold some sinecures he wished abolished,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that with them all Law would be demolished.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was “free to confess”⁠—(whence comes this phrase?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is ‘t English? No⁠—’tis only parliamentary)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That Innovation’s spirit now-a-days</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had made more progress than for the last century.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would not tread a factious path to praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though for the public weal disposed to venture high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As for his place, he could but say this of it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That the fatigue was greater than the profit.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Heaven, and his friends, knew that a private life</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had ever been his sole and whole ambition;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But could he quit his King in times of strife,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which threatened the whole country with perdition?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When demagogues would with a butcher’s knife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cut through and through (oh! damnable incision!)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Gordian or the G<i>e</i>ordi-an knot, whose strings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Have tied together Commons, Lords, and Kings.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Sooner “come Place into the Civil List</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And champion him to the utmost<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—” he would keep it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till duly disappointed or dismissed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Profit he cared not for, let others reap it;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But should the day come when Place ceased to exist,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The country would have far more cause to weep it:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For how could it go on? Explain who can!</span>
					<br/>
					<span><i>He</i> gloried in the name of Englishman.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He was as independent⁠—aye, much more⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than those who were not paid for independence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As common soldiers, or a common⁠—⁠shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have in their several arts or parts ascendance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’er the irregulars in lust or gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who do not give professional attendance.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus on the mob all statesmen are as eager</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To prove their pride, as footmen to a beggar.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>All this (save the last stanza) Henry said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thought. I say no more⁠—I’ve said too much;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all of us have either heard or read⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Off⁠—or <i>upon</i> the hustings⁠—some slight such</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hints from the independent heart or head</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the official candidate. I’ll touch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No more on this⁠—the dinner-bell hath rung,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grace is said; the grace I <i>should</i> have <i>sung</i>⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I’m too late, and therefore must make play.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twas a great banquet, such as Albion old</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was wont to boast⁠—as if a glutton’s tray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were something very glorious to behold.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But ’twas a public feast and public day⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quite full⁠—right dull⁠—guests hot, and dishes cold⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great plenty, much formality, small cheer⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And everybody out of their own sphere.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The squires familiarly formal, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My Lords and Ladies proudly condescending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very servants puzzling how to hand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their plates⁠—without it might be too much bending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From their high places by the sideboard’s stand⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Yet, like their masters, fearful of offending;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For any deviation from the graces</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might cost both man and master too⁠—their <i>places</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There were some hunters bold, and coursers keen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose hounds ne’er erred, nor greyhounds deigned to lurch;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some deadly shots too, Septembrizers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> seen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Earliest to rise, and last to quit the search</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the poor partridge through his stubble screen.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There were some massy members of the church,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Takers of tithes, and makers of good matches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And several who sung fewer psalms than catches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There were some country wags too⁠—and, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some exiles from the Town, who had been driven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gaze, instead of pavement, upon grass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rise at nine in lieu of long eleven.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And lo! upon that day it came to pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I sate next that o’erwhelming son of Heaven,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The very powerful parson, Peter Pith,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The loudest wit I e’er was deafened with.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I knew him in his livelier London days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A brilliant diner-out, though but a curate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And not a joke he cut but earned its praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until Preferment, coming at a sure rate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(O Providence! how wondrous are thy ways!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who would suppose thy gifts sometimes obdurate?)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gave him, to lay the Devil who looks o’er Lincoln,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A fat fen vicarage, and nought to think on.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His jokes were sermons, and his sermons jokes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But both were thrown away amongst the fens;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Wit hath no great friend in aguish folks.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No longer ready ears and short-hand pens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Imbibed the gay <i>bon-mot</i>, or happy hoax:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poor priest was reduced to common sense,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or to coarse efforts very loud and long,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hammer a hoarse laugh from the thick throng.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There <i>is</i> a difference, says the song, “between</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A beggar and a Queen,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> or <i>was</i> (of late</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The latter worse used of the two we’ve seen⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But we ‘ll say nothing of affairs of state);</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A difference “ ’twixt a Bishop and a Dean,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A difference between crockery ware and plate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As between English beef and Spartan broth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet great heroes have been bred by both.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But of all Nature’s discrepancies, none</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the whole is greater than the difference</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Beheld between the Country and the Town,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which the latter merits every preference</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From those who have few resources of their own.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And only think, or act, or feel, with reference</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To some small plan of interest or ambition⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Both which are limited to no condition.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But <i>En avant!</i> The light loves languish o’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Long banquets and too many guests, although</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A slight repast makes people love much more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bacchus and Ceres being, as we know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even from our grammar upwards, friends of yore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With vivifying Venus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> who doth owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To these the invention of champagne and truffles:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Temperance delights her, but long fasting ruffles.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Dully passed o’er the dinner of the day;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan took his place, he knew not where,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Confused, in the confusion, and <i>distrait</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And sitting as if nailed upon his chair:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though knives and forks clanked round as in a fray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He seemed unconscious of all passing there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till some one, with a groan, expressed a wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Unheeded twice) to have a fin of fish.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>On which, at the <i>third</i> asking of the banns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He started; and perceiving smiles around</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Broadening to grins, he coloured more than once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And hastily⁠—as nothing can confound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A wise man more than laughter from a dunce⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Inflicted on the dish a deadly wound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And with such hurry, that, ere he could curb it,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He had paid his neighbour’s prayer with half a turbot.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This was no bad mistake, as it occurred,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The supplicator being an amateur;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But others, who were left with scarce a third,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were angry⁠—as they well might, to be sure,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They wondered how a young man so absurd</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lord Henry at his table should endure;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this, and his not knowing how much oats</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had fallen last market, cost his host three votes.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They little knew, or might have sympathized,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he the night before had seen a ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A prologue which but slightly harmonized</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With the substantial company engrossed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By matter, and so much materialised,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That one scarce knew at what to marvel most</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of two things⁠—<i>how</i> (the question rather odd is)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such bodies could have souls, or souls such bodies!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what confused him more than smile or stare</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From all the ‘squires and ‘squiresses around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who wondered at the abstraction of his air,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Especially as he had been renowned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For some vivacity among the fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even in the country circle’s narrow bound⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(For little things upon my Lord’s estate</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were good small talk for others still less great)⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Was, that he caught Aurora’s eye on his,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And something like a smile upon her cheek.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now this he really rather took amiss;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In those who rarely smile, their smile bespeaks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A strong external motive; and in this</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Smile of Aurora’s there was nought to pique,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or Hope, or Love⁠—with any of the wiles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which some pretend to trace in ladies’ smiles.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas a mere quiet smile of contemplation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Indicative of some surprise and pity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Juan grew carnation with vexation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which was not very wise, and still less witty,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Since he had gained at least her observation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A most important outwork of the city⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Juan should have known, had not his senses</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By last night’s Ghost been driven from their defences.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But what was bad, she did not blush in turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor seem embarrassed⁠—quite the contrary;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her aspect was as usual, still⁠—<i>not</i> stern⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And she withdrew, but cast not down, her eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet grew a little pale⁠—with what? concern?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not; but her colour ne’er was high⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though sometimes faintly flushed⁠—and always clear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As deep seas in a sunny atmosphere.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Adeline was occupied by fame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This day; and watching, witching, condescending</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the consumers of fish, fowl, and game,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And dignity with courtesy so blending,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As all must blend whose part it is to aim</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Especially as the sixth year is ending)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At their lord’s, son’s, or similar connection’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Safe conduct through the rocks of re-elections.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Though this was most expedient on the whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And usual⁠—Juan, when he cast a glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On Adeline while playing her grand <i>rôle</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which she went through as though it were a dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Betraying only now and then her soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By a look scarce perceptibly askance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Of weariness or scorn), began to feel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some doubt how much of Adeline was <i>real</i>;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So well she acted all and every part</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By turns⁠—with that vivacious versatility,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which many people take for want of heart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They err⁠—’tis merely what is called mobility,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>A thing of temperament and not of art,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though seeming so, from its supposed facility;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And false⁠—though true; for, surely, they’re sincerest</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who are strongly acted on by what is nearest.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This makes your actors, artists, and romancers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heroes sometimes, though seldom⁠—sages never:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But speakers, bards, diplomatists, and dancers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Little that’s great, but much of what is clever;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most orators, but very few financiers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though all Exchequer Chancellors endeavour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of late years, to dispense with Cocker’s rigours,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And grow quite figurative with their figures.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The poets of Arithmetic are they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who, though they prove not two and two to be</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Five, as they might do in a modest way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have plainly made it out that four are three,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Judging by what they take, and what they pay:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Sinking Fund’s unfathomable sea,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That most unliquidating liquid, leaves</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The debt unsunk, yet sinks all it receives.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While Adeline dispensed her airs and graces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fair Fitz-Fulke seemed very much at ease;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though too well bred to quiz men to their faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her laughing blue eyes with a glance could seize</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ridicules of people in all places⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That honey of your fashionable bees⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And store it up for mischievous enjoyment;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And this at present was her kind employment.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>However, the day closed, as days must close;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The evening also waned⁠—and coffee came.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each carriage was announced, and ladies rose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And curtsying off, as curtsies country dame,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Retired: with most unfashionable bows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their docile Esquires also did the same,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Delighted with their dinner and their Host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But with the Lady Adeline the most.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some praised her beauty: others her great grace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The warmth of her politeness, whose sincerity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was obvious in each feature of her face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose traits were radiant with the rays of verity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yes; <i>she</i> was truly worthy <i>her</i> high place!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No one could envy her deserved prosperity.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then her dress⁠—what beautiful simplicity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Draperied her form with curious felicity!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meanwhile sweet Adeline deserved their praises,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By an impartial indemnification</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all her past exertion and soft phrases,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In a most edifying conversation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which turned upon their late guests’ miens and faces,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their families, even to the last relation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their hideous wives, their horrid selves and dresses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And truculent distortion of their tresses.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>True, <i>she</i> said little⁠—’twas the rest that broke</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth into universal epigram;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then ’twas to the purpose what she spoke:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Addison’s “faint praise,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> so wont to damn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her own but served to set off every joke,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As music chimes in with a melodrame.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How sweet the task to shield an absent friend!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I ask but this of mine, to⁠—⁠<i>not</i> defend.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>There were but two exceptions to this keen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Skirmish of wits o’er the departed; one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aurora, with her pure and placid mien;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan, too, in general behind none</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In gay remark on what he had heard or seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sate silent now, his usual spirits gone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In vain he heard the others rail or rally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He would not join them in a single sally.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Tis true he saw Aurora look as though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She approved his silence; she perhaps mistook</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its motive for that charity we owe</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But seldom pay the absent, nor would look</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Farther⁠—it might or it might not be so.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Juan, sitting silent in his nook,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Observing little in his reverie,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet saw this much, which he was glad to see.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Ghost at least had done him this much good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In making him as silent as a ghost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If in the circumstances which ensued</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He gained esteem where it was worth the most;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, certainly, Aurora had renewed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In him some feelings he had lately lost,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or hardened; feelings which, perhaps ideal,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are so divine, that I must deem them real:⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The love of higher things and better days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The unbounded hope, and heavenly ignorance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of what is called the World, and the World’s ways;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moments when we gather from a glance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>More joy than from all future pride or praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which kindle manhood, but can ne’er entrance</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Heart in an existence of its own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of which another’s bosom is the zone.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Who would not sigh <span title="Ai)/ ai)/ ta\n Kythe/reian">Αἴ αἴ τὰν Κυθέρειαν</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That <i>hath</i> a memory, or that <i>had</i> a heart?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Alas! <i>her</i> star must fade like that of Dian:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ray fades on ray, as years on years depart.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anacreon only had the soul to tie an</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Unwithering myrtle round the unblunted dart</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Eros: but though thou hast played us many tricks,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Still we respect thee, “<i>Alma Venus Genetrix!</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And full of sentiments, sublime as billows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Heaving between this World and Worlds beyond,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Don Juan, when the midnight hour of pillows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arrived, retired to his; but to despond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rather than rest. Instead of poppies, willows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Waved o’er his couch; he meditated, fond</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those sweet bitter thoughts which banish sleep,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And make the worldling sneer, the youngling weep.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The night was as before: he was undrest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Saving his night-gown, which is an undress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Completely <i>sans culotte</i>, and without vest;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In short, he hardly could be clothed with less:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But apprehensive of his spectral guest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He sate with feelings awkward to express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(By those who have not had such visitations),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Expectant of the Ghost’s fresh operations.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-112">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And not in vain he listened;⁠—Hush! what’s that?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I see⁠—I see⁠—Ah, no!⁠—‘t is not⁠—yet ‘t is⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ye powers! it is the⁠—the⁠—the⁠—Pooh! the cat!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Devil may take that stealthy pace of his!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So like a spiritual pit-a-pat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or tiptoe of an amatory Miss,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gliding the first time to a <i>rendezvous</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And dreading the chaste echoes of her shoe.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-113">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Again⁠—what is ‘t? The wind? No, no⁠—this time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It is the sable Friar as before,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With awful footsteps regular as rhyme,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or (as rhymes may be in these days) much more.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Again through shadows of the night sublime,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When deep sleep fell on men,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and the World wore</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The starry darkness round her like a girdle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spangled with gems⁠—the Monk made his blood curdle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-114">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A noise like to wet fingers drawn on glass,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which sets the teeth on edge; and a slight clatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like showers which on the midnight gusts will pass,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sounding like very supernatural water,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Came over Juan’s ear, which throbbed, alas!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Immaterialism’s a serious matter;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that even those whose faith is the most great</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In Souls immortal, shun them <i>tête-à-tête</i>.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-115">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Were his eyes open?⁠—Yes! and his mouth too.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surprise has this effect⁠—to make one dumb,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet leave the gate which Eloquence slips through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As wide as if a long speech were to come.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nigh and more nigh the awful echoes drew,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Tremendous to a mortal tympanum:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His eyes were open, and (as was before</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stated) his mouth. What opened next?⁠—the door.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-116">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It opened with a most infernal creak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like that of Hell. “Lasciate ogni speranza,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Voi, ch’ entrate!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> The hinge seemed to speak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dreadful as Dante’s <i>rima</i>, or this stanza;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or⁠—but all words upon such themes are weak:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A single shade’s sufficient to entrance a</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hero⁠—for what is Substance to a Spirit?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or how is ‘t <i>Matter</i> trembles to come near it?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-117">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The door flew wide, not swiftly⁠—but, as fly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sea-gulls, with a steady, sober flight⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then swung back; nor close⁠—but stood awry,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Half letting in long shadows on the light,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which still in Juan’s candlesticks burned high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For he had two, both tolerably bright,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And in the doorway, darkening darkness, stood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The sable Friar in his solemn hood.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-118">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Don Juan shook, as erst he had been shaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The night before; but being sick of shaking,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He first inclined to think he had been mistaken;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then to be ashamed of such mistaking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His own internal ghost began to awaken</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Within him, and to quell his corporal quaking⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hinting that Soul and Body on the whole</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were odds against a disembodied Soul.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-119">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then his dread grew wrath, and his wrath fierce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And he arose, advanced⁠—the Shade retreated;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But Juan, eager now the truth to pierce,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Followed, his veins no longer cold, but heated,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resolved to thrust the mystery <i>carte</i> and <i>tierce</i>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At whatsoever risk of being defeated:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Ghost stopped, menaced, then retired, until</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He reached the ancient wall, then stood stone still.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-120">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan put forth one arm⁠—Eternal powers!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It touched no soul, nor body, but the wall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which the moonbeams fell in silvery showers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Chequered with all the tracery of the Hall;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He shuddered, as no doubt the bravest cowers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When he can’t tell what ’tis that doth appal.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How odd, a single hobgoblin’s nonentity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should cause more fear than a whole host’s identity!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-121">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But still the Shade remained: the blue eyes glared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And rather variably for stony death;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet one thing rather good the grave had spared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The Ghost had a remarkably sweet breath:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A straggling curl showed he had been fair-haired;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A red lip, with two rows of pearls beneath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gleamed forth, as through the casement’s ivy shroud</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Moon peeped, just escaped from a grey cloud.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-122">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Juan, puzzled, but still curious, thrust</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His other arm forth⁠—Wonder upon wonder!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It pressed upon a hard but glowing bust,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which beat as if there was a warm heart under.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He found, as people on most trials must,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That he had made at first a silly blunder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that in his confusion he had caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Only the wall, instead of what he sought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-16-123">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Ghost, if Ghost it were, seemed a sweet soul</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As ever lurked beneath a holy hood:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dimpled chin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> a neck of ivory, stole</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Forth into something much like flesh and blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back fell the sable frock and dreary cowl,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And they revealed⁠—alas! that e’er they should!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In full, voluptuous, but <i>not o’er</i>grown bulk,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The phantom of her frolic Grace⁠—Fitz-Fulke!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
