<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Canto V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-428" id="noteref-428" epub:type="noteref">428</a>
			</h2>
			<section id="stanza-5-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When amatory poets sing their loves</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In liquid lines mellifluously bland,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And pair their rhymes as Venus yokes her doves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They little think what mischief is in hand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The greater their success the worse it proves,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Ovid’s verse may give to understand;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even Petrarch’s self, if judged with due severity,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is the Platonic pimp of all posterity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I therefore do denounce all amorous writing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Except in such a way as not to attract;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Plain⁠—simple⁠—short, and by no means inviting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But with a moral to each error tacked,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Formed rather for instructing than delighting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And with all passions in their turn attacked;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now, if my Pegasus should not be shod ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This poem will become a moral model.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The European with the Asian shore</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sprinkled with palaces⁠—the Ocean stream<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-429" id="noteref-429" epub:type="noteref">429</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here and there studded with a seventy-four,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sophia’s Cupola with golden gleam,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-430" id="noteref-430" epub:type="noteref">430</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cypress groves, Olympus high and hoar,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The twelve isles, and the more than I could dream,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Far less describe, present the very view</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which charmed the charming Mary Montagu.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I have a passion for the name of “Mary,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-431" id="noteref-431" epub:type="noteref">431</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For once it was a magic sound to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And still it half calls up the realms of Fairy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where I beheld what never was to be;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All feelings changed, but this was last to vary,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A spell from which even yet I am not quite free:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But I grow sad⁠—and let a tale grow cold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which must not be pathetically told.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The wind swept down the Euxine, and the wave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Broke foaming o’er the blue Symplegades;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis a grand sight from off “the Giant’s Grave”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-432" id="noteref-432" epub:type="noteref">432</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To watch the progress of those rolling seas</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Between the Bosphorus, as they lash and lave</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Europe and Asia, you being quite at ease:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s not a sea the passenger e’er pukes in,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turns up more dangerous breakers than the Euxine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>’Twas a raw day of Autumn’s bleak beginning,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When nights are equal, but not so the days;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Parcae then cut short the further spinning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of seamen’s fates, and the loud tempests raise<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-433" id="noteref-433" epub:type="noteref">433</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>The waters, and repentance for past sinning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all, who o’er the great deep take their ways:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They vow to amend their lives, and yet they don’t;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because if drowned, they can’t⁠—if spared, they won’t.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A crowd of shivering slaves of every nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And age, and sex, were in the market ranged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each bevy with the merchant in his station:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor creatures! their good looks were sadly changed.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All save the blacks seemed jaded with vexation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From friends, and home, and freedom far estranged;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The negroes more philosophy displayed⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Used to it, no doubt, as eels are to be flayed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan was juvenile, and thus was full,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As most at his age are, of hope, and health;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet I must own, he looked a little dull,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now and then a tear stole down by stealth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps his recent loss of blood might pull</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His spirit down; and then the loss of wealth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mistress, and such comfortable quarters,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To be put up for auction amongst Tartars,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Were things to shake a Stoic; ne’ertheless,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the whole his carriage was serene:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His figure, and the splendour of his dress,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of which some gilded remnants still were seen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drew all eyes on him, giving them to guess</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He was above the vulgar by his mien;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then, though pale, he was so very handsome;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then⁠—they calculated on his ransom.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-434" id="noteref-434" epub:type="noteref">434</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Like a backgammon board the place was dotted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whites and blacks, in groups on show for sale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though rather more irregularly spotted:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some bought the jet, while others chose the pale.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It chanced amongst the other people lotted,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-435" id="noteref-435" epub:type="noteref">435</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A man of thirty, rather stout and hale,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With resolution in his dark grey eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next Juan stood, till some might choose to buy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had an English look; that is, was square</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In make, of a complexion white and ruddy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Good teeth, with curling rather dark brown hair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, it might be from thought, or toil, or study,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An open brow a little marked with care:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One arm had on a bandage rather bloody;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there he stood with such sang froid, that greater</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could scarce be shown even by a mere spectator.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But seeing at his elbow a mere lad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a high spirit evidently, though</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At present weighed down by a doom which had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’erthrown even men, he soon began to show</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kind of blunt compassion for the sad</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lot of so young a partner in the woe,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which for himself he seemed to deem no worse</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than any other scrape, a thing of course.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“My boy!”⁠—said he, “amidst this motley crew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of Georgians, Russians, Nubians, and what not,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All ragamuffins differing but in hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With whom it is our luck to cast our lot,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The only gentlemen seem I and you;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So let us be acquainted, as we ought:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If I could yield you any consolation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T would give me pleasure.⁠—Pray, what is your nation?”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When Juan answered⁠—“Spanish!” he replied,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“I thought, in fact, you could not be a Greek;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those servile dogs are not so proudly eyed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Fortune has played you here a pretty freak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But that’s her way with all men, till they’re tried;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But never mind⁠—she’ll turn, perhaps, next week;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She has served me also much the same as you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Except that I have found it nothing new.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Pray, sir,” said Juan, “if I may presume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>What</em> brought you here?”⁠—“Oh! nothing very rare⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Six Tartars and a drag-chain⁠—”⁠—“To this doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But what conducted, if the question ’s fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is that which I would learn.”⁠—“I served for some</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Months with the Russian army here and there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And taking lately, by Suwarrow’s bidding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A town, was ta’en myself instead of Widdin.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-436" id="noteref-436" epub:type="noteref">436</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Have you no friends?”⁠—“I had⁠—but, by God’s blessing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have not been troubled with them lately. Now</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have answered all your questions without pressing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you an equal courtesy should show.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Alas!” said Juan, “ ’twere a tale distressing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And long besides.”⁠—“Oh! if ’tis really so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’re right on both accounts to hold your tongue;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A sad tale saddens doubly when ’tis long.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But droop not: Fortune at your time of life,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Although a female moderately fickle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Will hardly leave you (as she’s not your wife)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For any length of days in such a pickle.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To strive, too, with our fate were such a strife</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the corn-sheaf should oppose the sickle:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Men are the sport of circumstances, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The circumstances seem the sport of men.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-18">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Tis not,” said Juan, “for my present doom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I mourn, but for the past;⁠—I loved a maid:”⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He paused, and his dark eye grew full of gloom;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A single tear upon his eyelash staid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment, and then dropped; “but to resume,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis not my present lot, as I have said,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which I deplore so much; for I have borne</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hardships which have the hardiest overworn,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-19">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“On the rough deep. But this last blow⁠—” and here</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He stopped again, and turned away his face.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Aye,” quoth his friend, “I thought it would appear</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That there had been a lady in the case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And these are things which ask a tender tear,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Such as I, too, would shed if in your place:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I cried upon my first wife’s dying day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also when my second ran away:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-20">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“My third⁠—”⁠—“Your third!” quoth Juan, turning round;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“You scarcely can be thirty: have you three?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No⁠—only two at present above ground:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Surely ’tis nothing wonderful to see</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One person thrice in holy wedlock bound!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Well, then, your third,” said Juan; “what did she?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She did not run away, too⁠—did she, sir?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“No, faith.”⁠—“What then?”⁠—“I ran away from her.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-21">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You take things coolly, sir,” said Juan. “Why,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied the other, “what can a man do?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There still are many rainbows in your sky,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But mine have vanished. All, when Life is new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Commence with feelings warm, and prospects high;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Time strips our illusions of their hue,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And one by one in turn, some grand mistake</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Casts off its bright skin yearly like the snake.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-22">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’Tis true, it gets another bright and fresh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or fresher, brighter; but the year gone through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This skin must go the way, too, of all flesh,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or sometimes only wear a week or two;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Love’s the first net which spreads its deadly mesh;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ambition, Avarice, Vengeance, Glory, glue</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The glittering lime-twigs of our latter days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where still we flutter on for pence or praise.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-23">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“All this is very fine, and may be true,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Juan; “but I really don’t see how</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It betters present times with me or you.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“No?” quoth the other; “yet you will allow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By setting things in their right point of view,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knowledge, at least, is gained; for instance, now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We know what slavery is, and our disasters</span>
					<br/>
					<span>May teach us better to behave when masters.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-24">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Would we were masters now, if but to try</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their present lessons on our Pagan friends here,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said Juan⁠—swallowing a heart-burning sigh:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Heaven help the scholar, whom his fortune sends here!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Perhaps we shall be one day, by and by,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoined the other, “when our bad luck mends here;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime (yon old black eunuch seems to eye us)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish to G‑d that somebody would buy us.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-25">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“But after all, what <em>is</em> our present state?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis bad, and may be better⁠—all men’s lot:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most men are slaves, none more so than the great,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To their own whims and passions, and what not;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Society itself, which should create</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Kindness, destroys what little we had got:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To feel for none is the true social art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the world’s Stoics⁠—men without a heart.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-26">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Just now a black old neutral personage</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the third sex stepped up, and peering over</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The captives seemed to mark their looks and age,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And capabilities, as to discover</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they were fitted for the purposed cage:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No lady e’er is ogled by a lover,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Horse by a blackleg, broadcloth by a tailor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fee by a counsel, felon by a jailor,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-27">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As is a slave by his intended bidder.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis pleasant purchasing our fellow-creatures;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all are to be sold, if you consider</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their passions, and are dext’rous; some by features</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are bought up, others by a warlike leader,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some by a place⁠—as tend their years or natures:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The most by ready cash⁠—but all have prices,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From crowns to kicks, according to their vices.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-28">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The eunuch, having eyed them o’er with care,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Turned to the merchant, and began to bid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>First but for one, and after for the pair;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They haggled, wrangled, swore, too⁠—so they did!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As though they were in a mere Christian fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cheapening an ox, an ass, a lamb, or kid;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that their bargain sounded like a battle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For this superior yoke of human cattle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-29">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At last they settled into simple grumbling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And pulling out reluctant purses, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Turning each piece of silver o’er, and tumbling</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some down, and weighing others in their hand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And by mistake sequins<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-437" id="noteref-437" epub:type="noteref">437</a> with paras jumbling,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Until the sum was accurately scanned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then the merchant giving change, and signing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Receipts in full, began to think of dining.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-30">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I wonder if his appetite was good?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or, if it were, if also his digestion?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks at meals some odd thoughts might intrude,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Conscience ask a curious sort of question,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>About the right divine how far we should</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sell flesh and blood. When dinner has oppressed one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I think it is perhaps the gloomiest hour</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which turns up out of the sad twenty-four.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-31">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Voltaire says “No:” he tells you that Candide</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Found life most tolerable after meals;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-438" id="noteref-438" epub:type="noteref">438</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He’s wrong⁠—unless man were a pig, indeed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Repletion rather adds to what he feels,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless he’s drunk, and then no doubt he’s freed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From his own brain’s oppression while it reels.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of food I think with Philip’s son<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-439" id="noteref-439" epub:type="noteref">439</a> or rather</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ammon’s (ill pleased with one world and one father);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-440" id="noteref-440" epub:type="noteref">440</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-32">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I think with Alexander, that the act</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of eating, with another act or two,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Makes us feel our mortality in fact</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Redoubled; when a roast and a ragout,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fish, and soup, by some side dishes backed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can give us either pain or pleasure, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would pique himself on intellects, whose use</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Depends so much upon the gastric juice?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-33">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The other evening (’twas on Friday last)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This is a fact, and no poetic fable⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just as my great coat was about me cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">My hat and gloves still lying on the table,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I heard a shot⁠—’twas eight o’clock scarce past⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, running out as fast as I was able,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-441" id="noteref-441" epub:type="noteref">441</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I found the military commandant</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stretched in the street, and able scarce to pant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-34">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Poor fellow! for some reason, surely bad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They had slain him with five slugs; and left him there</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To perish on the pavement: so I had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Him borne into the house and up the stair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And stripped, and looked to<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-442" id="noteref-442" epub:type="noteref">442</a>⁠—But why should I add</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More circumstances? vain was every care;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The man was gone⁠—in some Italian quarrel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Killed by five bullets from an old gun-barrel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-35">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I gazed upon him, for I knew him well;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And though I have seen many corpses, never</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Saw one, whom such an accident befell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So calm; though pierced through stomach, heart, and liver,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He seemed to sleep⁠—for you could scarcely tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(As he bled inwardly, no hideous river</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of gore divulged the cause) that he was dead:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So as I gazed on him, I thought or said⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-36">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Can this be Death? then what is Life or Death?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Speak!” but he spoke not: “wake!” but still he slept:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“But yesterday and who had mightier breath?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand warriors by his word were kept</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In awe: he said, as the Centurion saith,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">‘Go,’ and he goeth; ‘come,’ and forth he stepped.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The trump and bugle till he spake were dumb⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now nought left him but the muffled drum.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-443" id="noteref-443" epub:type="noteref">443</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-37">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And they who waited once and worshipped⁠—they</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With their rough faces thronged about the bed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To gaze once more on the commanding clay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which for the last, though not the first, time bled;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And such an end! that he who many a day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had faced Napoleon’s foes until they fled⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The foremost in the charge or in the sally,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Should now be butchered in a civic alley.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-38">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The scars of his old wounds were near his new,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those honourable scars which brought him fame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And horrid was the contrast to the view⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But let me quit the theme; as such things claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps even more attention than is due</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From me: I gazed (as oft I have gazed the same)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To try if I could wrench aught out of Death</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which should confirm, or shake, or make a faith;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-39">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But it was all a mystery. Here we are,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And there we go:⁠—but <em>where</em>? five bits of lead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or three, or two, or one, send very far!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And is this blood, then, formed but to be shed?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Can every element our elements mar?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Air⁠—Earth⁠—Water⁠—Fire live⁠—and we dead?</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>We</em>, whose minds comprehend all things? No more;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But let us to the story as before.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-40">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The purchaser of Juan and acquaintance</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bore off his bargains to a gilded boat,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Embarked himself and them, and off they went thence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As fast as oars could pull and water float;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They looked like persons being led to sentence,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wondering what next, till the caïque<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-444" id="noteref-444" epub:type="noteref">444</a> was brought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up in a little creek below a wall</span>
					<br/>
					<span>O’ertopped with cypresses, dark-green and tall.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-41">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here their conductor tapping at the wicket</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a small iron door, ’twas opened, and</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He led them onward, first through a low thicket</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Flanked by large groves, which towered on either hand:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They almost lost their way, and had to pick it⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For night was closing ere they came to land.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The eunuch made a sign to those on board,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who rowed off, leaving them without a word.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-42">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As they were plodding on their winding way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Through orange bowers, and jasmine, and so forth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Of which I might have a good deal to say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There being no such profusion in the North</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of oriental plants, et cetera,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But that of late your scribblers think it worth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their while to rear whole hotbeds in <em>their</em> works,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because <em>one</em> poet travelled ’mongst the Turks:)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-445" id="noteref-445" epub:type="noteref">445</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-43">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As they were threading on their way, there came</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into Don Juan’s head a thought, which he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whispered to his companion:⁠—’twas the same</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which might have then occurred to you or me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Methinks,”⁠—said he⁠—“it would be no great shame</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If we should strike a stroke to set us free;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let’s knock that old black fellow on the head,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And march away⁠—’twere easier done than said.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-44">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Yes,” said the other, “and when done, what then?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1"><em>How</em> get out? how the devil got we in?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when we once were fairly out, and when</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From Saint Bartholomew we have saved our skin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-446" id="noteref-446" epub:type="noteref">446</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-447" id="noteref-447" epub:type="noteref">447</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To-morrow’d see us in some other den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And worse off than we hitherto have been;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Besides, I’m hungry, and just now would take,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like Esau, for my birthright a beef-steak.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-45">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“We must be near some place of man’s abode;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For the old negro’s confidence in creeping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With his two captives, by so queer a road,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shows that he thinks his friends have not been sleeping;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A single cry would bring them all abroad:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis better therefore looking before leaping⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And there, you see, this turn has brought us through,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By Jove, a noble palace!⁠—lighted too.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-46">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It was indeed a wide extensive building</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which opened on their view, and o’er the front</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There seemed to be besprent a deal of gilding</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And various hues, as is the Turkish wont⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A gaudy taste; for they are little skilled in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The arts of which these lands were once the font:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each villa on the Bosphorus looks a screen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>New painted, or a pretty opera-scene.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-448" id="noteref-448" epub:type="noteref">448</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-47">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And nearer as they came, a genial savour</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of certain stews, and roast-meats, and pilaus,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Things which in hungry mortals’ eyes find favour,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made Juan in his harsh intentions pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And put himself upon his good behaviour:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His friend, too, adding a new saving clause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Said, “In Heaven’s name let’s get some supper now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then I’m with you, if you’re for a row.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-48">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some talk of an appeal unto some passion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some to men’s feelings, others to their reason;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The last of these was never much the fashion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For Reason thinks all reasoning out of season:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some speakers whine, and others lay the lash on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But more or less continue still to tease on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With arguments according to their “forte:”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no one ever dreams of being short.⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-49">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But I digress: of all appeals⁠—although</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I grant the power of pathos, and of gold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of beauty, flattery, threats, a shilling⁠—no</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Method’s more sure at moments to take hold<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-449" id="noteref-449" epub:type="noteref">449</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of the best feelings of mankind, which grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More tender, as we every day behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than that all-softening, overpowering knell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Tocsin of the Soul⁠—the dinner-bell.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-50">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">L</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Turkey contains no bells, and yet men dine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan and his friend, albeit they heard</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No Christian knoll to table, saw no line</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of lackeys usher to the feast prepared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet smelt roast-meat, beheld a huge fire shine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And cooks in motion with their clean arms bared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gazed around them to the left and right,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With the prophetic eye of appetite.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-51">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And giving up all notions of resistance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They followed close behind their sable guide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who little thought that his own cracked existence</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was on the point of being set aside:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He motioned them to stop at some small distance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And knocking at the gate, ’twas opened wide,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a magnificent large hall displayed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Asian pomp of Ottoman parade.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-52">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I won’t describe; description is my “forte,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But every fool describes in these bright days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wondrous journey to some foreign court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And spawns his quarto, and demands your praise⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Death to his publisher, to him ’tis sport;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While Nature, tortured twenty thousand ways,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Resigns herself with exemplary patience</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To guide-books, rhymes, tours, sketches, illustrations.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-450" id="noteref-450" epub:type="noteref">450</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-53">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Along this hall, and up and down, some, squatted</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon their hams, were occupied at chess;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Others in monosyllable talk chatted,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And some seemed much in love with their own dress;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And divers smoked superb pipes decorated</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With amber mouths of greater price or less;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And several strutted, others slept, and some</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Prepared for supper with a glass of rum.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-451" id="noteref-451" epub:type="noteref">451</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-54">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As the black eunuch entered with his brace</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of purchased Infidels, some raised their eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment, without slackening from their pace;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But those who sate ne’er stirred in any wise:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One or two stared the captives in the face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as one views a horse to guess his price;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some nodded to the negro from their station,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But no one troubled him with conversation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-452" id="noteref-452" epub:type="noteref">452</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-55">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He leads them through the hall, and, without stopping,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On through a farther range of goodly rooms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Splendid, but silent, save in <em>one</em>, where dropping<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-453" id="noteref-453" epub:type="noteref">453</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A marble fountain echoes through the glooms</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of night which robe the chamber, or where popping</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Some female head most curiously presumes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To thrust its black eyes through the door or lattice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As wondering what the <em>devil</em> noise that is!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-56">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Some faint lamps gleaming from the lofty walls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave light enough to hint their farther way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But not enough to show the imperial halls</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In all the flashing of their full array;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Perhaps there’s nothing⁠—I’ll not say appals,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But saddens more by night as well as day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than an enormous room without a soul<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-454" id="noteref-454" epub:type="noteref">454</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>To break the lifeless splendour of the whole.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-57">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Two or three seem so little, <em>one</em> seems nothing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In deserts, forests, crowds, or by the shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>There</em> Solitude, we know, has her full growth in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spots which were her realms for evermore;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But in a mighty hall or gallery, both in</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">More modern buildings and those built of yore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kind of Death comes o’er us all alone,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Seeing what’s meant for many with but one.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-58">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A neat, snug study on a winter’s night,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-455" id="noteref-455" epub:type="noteref">455</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A book, friend, single lady, or a glass</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of claret, sandwich, and an appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Are things which make an English evening pass⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though certes by no means so grand a sight</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As is a theatre lit up by gas⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>I</em> pass my evenings in long galleries solely,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-456" id="noteref-456" epub:type="noteref">456</a><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-457" id="noteref-457" epub:type="noteref">457</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And that’s the reason I’m so melancholy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-59">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Alas! Man makes that great which makes him little⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I grant you in a church ’tis very well:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What speaks of Heaven should by no means be brittle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But strong and lasting, till no tongue can tell</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their names who reared it; but huge houses fit ill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And huge tombs, worse, Mankind⁠—since Adam fell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Methinks the story of the tower of Babel</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might teach them this much better than I’m able.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-60">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Babel was Nimrod’s hunting-box, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A town of gardens, walls, and wealth amazing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where Nabuchadonosor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-458" id="noteref-458" epub:type="noteref">458</a> King of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Reigned, till one summer’s day he took to grazing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Daniel tamed the lions in their den,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The people’s awe and admiration raising;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Twas famous, too, for Thisbe and for Pyramus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-459" id="noteref-459" epub:type="noteref">459</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the calumniated queen Semiramis⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-61">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>That injured Queen, by chroniclers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-460" id="noteref-460" epub:type="noteref">460</a> so coarse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Has been accused (I doubt not by conspiracy)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of an improper friendship for her horse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Love, like Religion, sometimes runs to heresy):</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This monstrous tale had probably its source</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(For such exaggerations here and there I see)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In writing “Courser” by mistake for “Courier:”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-461" id="noteref-461" epub:type="noteref">461</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish the case could come before a jury here.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-462" id="noteref-462" epub:type="noteref">462</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-62">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to resume⁠—should there be (what may not</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be in these days?) some infidels, who don’t,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because they can’t find out the very spot</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of that same Babel, or because they won’t</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Though Claudius Rich, Esquire, some bricks has got,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And written lately two memoirs upon ’t),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-463" id="noteref-463" epub:type="noteref">463</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Believe the Jews, those unbelievers, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must be believed, though they believe not you:</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-63">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Yet let them think that Horace has expressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shortly and sweetly the masonic folly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of those, forgetting the great place of rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who give themselves to Architecture wholly;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We know where things and men must end at best:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moral (like all morals) melancholy,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And “<i xml:lang="la">Et sepulchri immemor struis domos</i>”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shows that we build when we should but entomb us.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-64">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At last they reached a quarter most retired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Where Echo woke as if from a long slumber;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though full of all things which could be desired,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">One wondered what to do with such a number</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of articles which nobody required;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here Wealth had done its utmost to encumber</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With furniture an exquisite apartment,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which puzzled Nature much to know what Art meant.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-65">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It seemed, however, but to open on</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A range or suite of further chambers, which</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might lead to Heaven knows where; but in this one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The moveables were prodigally rich:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sofas ’twas half a sin to sit upon,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So costly were they; carpets every stitch</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of workmanship so rare, they made you wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You could glide o’er them like a golden fish.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-66">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The black, however, without hardly deigning</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A glance at that which wrapped the slaves in wonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trampled what they scarce trod for fear of staining,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As if the milky way their feet was under</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With all its stars; and with a stretch attaining</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A certain press or cupboard niched in yonder,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In that remote recess which you may see⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or if you don’t the fault is not in me⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-67">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I wish to be perspicuous⁠—and the black,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I say, unlocking the recess, pulled forth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A quantity of clothes fit for the back</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of any Mussulman, whate’er his worth;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And of variety there was no lack⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And yet, though I have said there was no dearth⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He chose himself to point out what he thought</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most proper for the Christians he had bought.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-68">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The suit he thought most suitable to each</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was, for the elder and the stouter, first</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A Candiote cloak, which to the knee might reach,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And trousers not so tight that they would burst,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But such as fit an Asiatic breech;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A shawl, whose folds in Cashmire had been nursed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Slippers of saffron, dagger rich and handy;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In short, all things which form a Turkish Dandy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-69">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>While he was dressing, Baba, their black friend,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hinted the vast advantages which they</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Might probably attain both in the end,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If they would but pursue the proper way</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which Fortune plainly seemed to recommend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then he added, that he needs must say,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“ ’T would greatly tend to better their condition,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If they would condescend to circumcision.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-70">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For his own part, he really should rejoice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To see them true believers, but no less</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would leave his proposition to their choice.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The other, thanking him for this excess</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of goodness, in thus leaving them a voice</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such a trifle, scarcely could express</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Sufficiently” (he said) “his approbation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of all the customs of this polished nation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-71">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“For his own share⁠—he saw but small objection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To so respectable an ancient rite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, after swallowing down a slight refection,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For which he owned a present appetite,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He doubted not a few hours of reflection</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Would reconcile him to the business quite.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Will it?” said Juan, sharply: “Strike me dead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But they as soon shall circumcise my head!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-464" id="noteref-464" epub:type="noteref">464</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-72">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Cut off a thousand heads, before⁠—”⁠—“Now, pray,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Replied the other, “do not interrupt:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You put me out in what I had to say.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sir!⁠—as I said, as soon as I have supped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I shall perpend if your proposal may</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Be such as I can properly accept;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Provided always your great goodness still</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Remits the matter to our own free-will.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-73">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Baba eyed Juan, and said, “Be so good</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As dress yourself⁠—” and pointed out a suit</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In which a Princess with great pleasure would</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Array her limbs; but Juan standing mute,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As not being in a masquerading mood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Gave it a slight kick with his Christian foot;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And when the old negro told him to “Get ready,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied, “Old gentleman, I’m not a lady.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-74">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“What you may be, I neither know nor care,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Baba; “but pray do as I desire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no more time nor many words to spare.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“At least,” said Juan, “sure I may inquire</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cause of this odd travesty?”⁠—“Forbear,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Said Baba, “to be curious; ’t will transpire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No doubt, in proper place, and time, and season:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I have no authority to tell the reason.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-75">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Then if I do,” said Juan, “I’ll be⁠—”⁠—“Hold!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rejoined the negro, “pray be not provoking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This spirit’s well, but it may wax too bold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And you will find us not too fond of joking.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“What, sir!” said Juan, “shall it e’er be told</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That I unsexed my dress?” But Baba, stroking</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The things down, said, “Incense me, and I call</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Those who will leave you of no sex at all.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-76">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“I offer you a handsome suit of clothes:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A woman’s, true; but then there is a cause</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why you should wear them.”⁠—“What, though my soul loathes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The effeminate garb?”⁠—thus, after a short pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sighed Juan, muttering also some slight oaths,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“What the devil shall I do with all this gauze?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus he profanely termed the finest lace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which e’er set off a marriage-morning face.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-77">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And then he swore; and, sighing, on he slipped</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A pair of trousers of flesh-coloured silk;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-465" id="noteref-465" epub:type="noteref">465</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Next with a virgin zone he was equipped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which girt a slight chemise as white as milk;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But tugging on his petticoat, he tripped,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which⁠—as we say⁠—or as the Scotch say, <em>whilk</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-466" id="noteref-466" epub:type="noteref">466</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>(The rhyme obliges me to this; sometimes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monarchs are less imperative than rhymes)⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-467" id="noteref-467" epub:type="noteref">467</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-78">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whilk, which (or what you please), was owing to</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His garment’s novelty, and his being awkward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet at last he managed to get through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His toilet, though no doubt a little backward:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The negro Baba helped a little too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When some untoward part of raiment stuck hard;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, wrestling both his arms into a gown,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He paused, and took a survey up and down.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-79">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>One difficulty still remained⁠—his hair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was hardly long enough; but Baba found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So many false long tresses all to spare,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That soon his head was most completely crowned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After the manner then in fashion there;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And this addition with such gems was bound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As suited the ensemble of his toilet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While Baba made him comb his head and oil it.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-80">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And now being femininely all arrayed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With some small aid from scissors, paint, and tweezers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He looked in almost all respects a maid,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-468" id="noteref-468" epub:type="noteref">468</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Baba smilingly exclaimed, “You see, sirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A perfect transformation here displayed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And now, then, you must come along with me, sirs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is⁠—the Lady:” clapping his hands twice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four blacks were at his elbow in a trice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-81">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You, sir,” said Baba, nodding to the one,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“Will please to accompany those gentlemen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To supper; but you, worthy Christian nun,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Will follow me: no trifling, sir; for when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say a thing, it must at once be done.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">What fear you? think you this a lion’s den?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why, ’tis a palace; where the truly wise</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Anticipate the Prophet’s paradise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-82">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“You fool! I tell you no one means you harm.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">“So much the better,” Juan said, “for them;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Else they shall feel the weight of this my arm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which is not quite so light as you may deem.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I yield thus far; but soon will break the charm,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">If any take me for that which I seem:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that I trust for every body’s sake,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That this disguise may lead to no mistake.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-83">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Blockhead! come on, and see,” quoth Baba; while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Don Juan, turning to his comrade, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though somewhat grieved, could scarce forbear a smile</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Upon the metamorphosis in view⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Farewell!” they mutually exclaimed: “this soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Seems fertile in adventures strange and new;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One’s turned half Mussulman, and one a maid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By this old black enchanter’s unsought aid.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-84">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Farewell!” said Juan: “should we meet no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wish you a good appetite.”⁠—“Farewell!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Replied the other; “though it grieves me sore:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When we next meet, we’ll have a tale to tell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We needs must follow when Fate puts from shore.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Keep your good name; though Eve herself once fell.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Nay,” quoth the maid, “the Sultan’s self shan’t carry me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Unless his Highness promises to marry me.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-85">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And thus they parted, each by separate doors;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Baba led Juan onward, room by room,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Through glittering galleries, and o’er marble floors,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Till a gigantic portal through the gloom,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Haughty and huge, along the distance lowers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wafted far arose a rich perfume:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seemed as though they came upon a shrine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all was vast, still, fragrant, and divine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-86">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The giant door was broad, and bright, and high,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of gilded bronze, and carved in curious guise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Warriors thereon were battling furiously;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Here stalks the victor, there the vanquished lies;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There captives led in triumph droop the eye,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And in perspective many a squadron flies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It seems the work of times before the line</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Rome transplanted fell with Constantine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-87">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This massy portal stood at the wide close</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of a huge hall, and on its either side</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Two little dwarfs, the least you could suppose,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were sate, like ugly imps, as if allied</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In mockery to the enormous gate which rose</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">O’er them in almost pyramidic pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gate so splendid was in all its <em>features</em>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-469" id="noteref-469" epub:type="noteref">469</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>You never thought about those little creatures,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-88">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Until you nearly trod on them, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You started back in horror to survey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The wondrous hideousness of those small men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose colour was not black, nor white, nor grey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But an extraneous mixture, which no pen</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Can trace, although perhaps the pencil may;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They were mis-shapen pygmies, deaf and dumb⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Monsters, who cost a no less monstrous sum.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-89">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">LXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Their duty was⁠—for they were strong, and though</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They looked so little, did strong things at times⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To ope this door, which they could really do,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The hinges being as smooth as Rogers’ rhymes;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now and then, with tough strings of the bow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As is the custom of those Eastern climes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To give some rebel Pacha a cravat⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For mutes are generally used for that.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-90">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XC</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They spoke by signs⁠—that is, not spoke at all;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking like two Incubi, they glared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As Baba with his fingers made them fall</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To heaving back the portal folds: it scared</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan a moment, as this pair so small,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With shrinking serpent optics on him stared;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-470" id="noteref-470" epub:type="noteref">470</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>It was as if their little looks could poison</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or fascinate whome’er they fixed their eyes on.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-91">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Before they entered, Baba paused to hint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To Juan some slight lessons as his guide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“If you could just contrive,” he said, “to stint</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That somewhat manly majesty of stride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’T would be as well, and⁠—(though there’s not much in’t)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To swing a little less from side to side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which has at times an aspect of the oddest;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And also could you look a little modest,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-92">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“ ’T would be convenient; for these mutes have eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like needles, which may pierce those petticoats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And if they should discover your disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">You know how near us the deep Bosphorus floats;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And you and I may chance, ere morning rise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To find our way to Marmora without boats,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stitched up in sacks⁠—a mode of navigation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A good deal practised here upon occasion.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-471" id="noteref-471" epub:type="noteref">471</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-93">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>With this encouragement he led the way</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a room still nobler than the last;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A rich confusion formed a disarray</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In such sort, that the eye along it cast</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could hardly carry anything away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Object on object flashed so bright and fast;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A dazzling mass of gems, and gold, and glitter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Magnificently mingled in a litter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-94">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Wealth had done wonders⁠—taste not much; such things</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Occur in Orient palaces, and even</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In the more chastened domes of Western kings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Of which I have also seen some six or seven),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where I can’t say or gold or diamond flings</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Great lustre, there is much to be forgiven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Groups of bad statues, tables, chairs, and pictures,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On which I cannot pause to make my strictures.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-95">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>In this imperial hall, at distance lay</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Under a canopy, and there reclined</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Quite in a confidential queenly way,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A lady; Baba stopped, and kneeling signed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To Juan, who though not much used to pray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Knelt down by instinct, wondering in his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What all this meant: while Baba bowed and bended</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His head, until the ceremony ended.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-96">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The lady rising up with such an air</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As Venus rose with from the wave, on them</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bent like an antelope a Paphian pair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-472" id="noteref-472" epub:type="noteref">472</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of eyes, which put out each surrounding gem;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And raising up an arm as moonlight fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She signed to Baba, who first kissed the hem</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of her deep purple robe, and, speaking low,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pointed to Juan who remained below.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-97">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her presence was as lofty as her state;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her beauty of that overpowering kind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose force Description only would abate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I’d rather leave it much to your own mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than lessen it by what I could relate</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of forms and features; it would strike you blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could I do justice to the full detail;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So, luckily for both, my phrases fail.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-98">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus much however I may add⁠—her years</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were ripe, they might make six-and-twenty springs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there are forms which Time to touch forbears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And turns aside his scythe to vulgar things:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-473" id="noteref-473" epub:type="noteref">473</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such as was Mary’s, Queen of Scots; true⁠—tears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Love destroy; and sapping Sorrow wrings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charms from the charmer, yet some never grow</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ugly; for instance⁠—Ninon de l’Enclos.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-474" id="noteref-474" epub:type="noteref">474</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-99">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XCIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She spake some words to her attendants, who</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Composed a choir of girls, ten or a dozen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And were all clad alike; like Juan, too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Who wore their uniform, by Baba chosen:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They formed a very nymph-like looking crew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-475" id="noteref-475" epub:type="noteref">475</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which might have called Diana’s chorus “cousin,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As far as outward show may correspond⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I won’t be bail for anything beyond.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-100">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">C</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>They bowed obeisance and withdrew, retiring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But not by the same door through which came in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baba and Juan, which last stood admiring,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At some small distance, all he saw within</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This strange saloon, much fitted for inspiring</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Marvel and praise; for both or none things win;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I must say, I ne’er could see the very</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Great happiness of the “<i xml:lang="la">Nil admirari.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-476" id="noteref-476" epub:type="noteref">476</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-101">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Not to admire is all the art I know</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Plain truth, dear Murray, needs few flowers of speech)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To make men happy, or to keep them so”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(So take it in the very words of Creech)⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thus Horace wrote we all know long ago;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And thus Pope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-477" id="noteref-477" epub:type="noteref">477</a> quotes the precept to re-teach</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From his translation; but had <em>none admired</em>,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would Pope have sung, or Horace been inspired?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-478" id="noteref-478" epub:type="noteref">478</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-102">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Baba, when all the damsels were withdrawn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Motioned to Juan to approach, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A second time desired him to kneel down,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kiss the lady’s foot; which maxim when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He heard repeated, Juan with a frown</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Drew himself up to his full height again,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And said, “It grieved him, but he could not stoop</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To any shoe, unless it shod the Pope.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-103">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Baba, indignant at this ill-timed pride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Made fierce remonstrances, and then a threat</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He muttered (but the last was given aside)</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About a bow-string⁠—quite in vain; not yet</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would Juan bend, though ’twere to Muhammad’s bride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There’s nothing in the world like <em>etiquette</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>In kingly chambers or imperial halls,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As also at the Race and County Balls.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-104">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He stood like Atlas, with a world of words</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">About his ears, and nathless would not bend;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood of all his line’s Castilian lords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Boiled in his veins, and, rather than descend</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To stain his pedigree, a thousand swords</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A thousand times of him had made an end;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At length perceiving the “foot” could not stand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Baba proposed that he should kiss the hand,</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-105">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Here was an honourable compromise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A half-way house of diplomatic rest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where they might meet in much more peaceful guise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Juan now his willingness expressed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To use all fit and proper courtesies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Adding, that this was commonest and best,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For through the South, the custom still commands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The gentleman to kiss the lady’s hands.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-106">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And he advanced, though with but a bad grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though on more <em>thorough-bred</em><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-479" id="noteref-479" epub:type="noteref">479</a> or fairer fingers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No lips e’er left their transitory trace:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">On such as these the lip too fondly lingers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And for one kiss would fain imprint a brace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As you will see, if she you love shall bring hers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In contact; and sometimes even a fair stranger’s</span>
					<br/>
					<span>An almost twelvemonth’s constancy endangers.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-107">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The lady eyed him o’er and o’er, and bade</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Baba retire, which he obeyed in style,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if well used to the retreating trade;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And taking hints in good part all the while,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He whispered Juan not to be afraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking on him with a sort of smile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Took leave, with such a face of satisfaction,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As good men wear who have done a virtuous action.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-108">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>When he was gone, there was a sudden change:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I know not what might be the lady’s thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But o’er her bright brow flashed a tumult strange,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And into her clear cheek the blood was brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Blood-red as sunset summer clouds which range</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The verge of Heaven; and in her large eyes wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A mixture of sensations might be scanned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of half voluptuousness and half command.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-109">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her form had all the softness of her sex,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her features all the sweetness of the Devil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When he put on the Cherub to perplex<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-480" id="noteref-480" epub:type="noteref">480</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Eve, and paved (God knows how) the road to evil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sun himself was scarce more free from specks</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Than she from aught at which the eye could cavil;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet, somehow, there was something somewhere wanting,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As if she rather <em>ordered</em> than was <em>granting</em>.⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-110">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Something imperial, or imperious, threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A chain o’er all she did; that is, a chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was thrown as ’twere about the neck of you⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Rapture’s self will seem almost a pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With aught which looks like despotism in view;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Our souls at least are free, and ’tis in vain</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We would against them make the flesh obey⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The spirit in the end will have its way.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-111">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her very smile was haughty, though so sweet;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her very nod was not an inclination;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a self-will even in her small feet,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As though they were quite conscious of her station⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They trod as upon necks; and to complete</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her state (it is the custom of her nation),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A poniard decked her girdle, as the sign</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was a Sultan’s bride (thank Heaven, not mine!).</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-112">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“To hear and to obey” had been from birth</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The law of all around her; to fulfil</span>
					<br/>
					<span>All fantasies which yielded joy or mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Had been her slaves’ chief pleasure, as her will;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her blood was high, her beauty scarce of earth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Judge, then, if her caprices e’er stood still;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had she but been a Christian, I’ve a notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We should have found out the “perpetual motion.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-113">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Whate’er she saw and coveted was brought;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er she did <em>not</em> see, if she supposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It might be seen, with diligence was sought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And when ’twas found straightway the bargain closed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was no end unto the things she bought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor to the trouble which her fancies caused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Yet even her tyranny had such a grace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The women pardoned all except her face.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-481" id="noteref-481" epub:type="noteref">481</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-114">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan, the latest of her whims, had caught</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her eye in passing on his way to sale;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She ordered him directly to be bought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Baba, who had ne’er been known to fail</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In any kind of mischief to be wrought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At all such auctions knew how to prevail:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-482" id="noteref-482" epub:type="noteref">482</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>She had no prudence, but he had⁠—and this</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Explains the garb which Juan took amiss.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-115">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His youth and features favoured the disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And should you ask how she, a Sultan’s bride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Could risk or compass such strange fantasies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">This I must leave sultanas to decide:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Emperors are only husbands in wives’ eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And kings and consorts oft are mystified,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-483" id="noteref-483" epub:type="noteref">483</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>As we may ascertain with due precision,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some by experience, others by tradition.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-116">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But to the main point, where we have been tending:⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She now conceived all difficulties past,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And deemed herself extremely condescending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When, being made her property at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Without more preface, in her blue eyes blending</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passion and power, a glance on him she cast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And merely saying, “Christian, canst thou love?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conceived that phrase was quite enough to move.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-117">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And so it was, in proper time and place;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But Juan, who had still his mind o’erflowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With Haidée’s isle and soft Ionian face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Felt the warm blood, which in his face was glowing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Rush back upon his heart, which filled apace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And left his cheeks as pale as snowdrops blowing:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These words went through his soul like Arab spears,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-484" id="noteref-484" epub:type="noteref">484</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that he spoke not, but burst into tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-118">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She was a good deal shocked; not shocked at tears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For women shed and use them at their liking;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But there is something when man’s eye appears</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Wet, still more disagreeable and striking:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A woman’s tear-drop melts, a man’s half sears,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like molten lead, as if you thrust a pike in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His heart to force it out, for (to be shorter)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To them ’tis a relief, to us a torture.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-119">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And she would have consoled, but knew not how:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Having no equals, nothing which had e’er</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Infected her with sympathy till now,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And never having dreamt what ’twas to bear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aught of a serious, sorrowing kind, although</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">There might arise some pouting petty care</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cross her brow, she wondered how so near</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her eyes another’s eye could shed a tear.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-120">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But Nature teaches more than power can spoil,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-485" id="noteref-485" epub:type="noteref">485</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And, when a <em>strong</em> although a strange sensation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Moves⁠—female hearts are such a genial soil</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For kinder feelings, whatso’er their nation,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>They naturally pour the “wine and oil,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Samaritans in every situation;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus Gulbeyaz, though she knew not why,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt an odd glistening moisture in her eye.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-121">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>But tears must stop like all things else; and soon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Juan, who for an instant had been moved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To such a sorrow by the intrusive tone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one who dared to ask if “he <em>had</em> loved,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Called back the Stoic to his eyes, which shone</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Bright with the very weakness he reproved;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And although sensitive to beauty, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Felt most indignant still at not being free.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-122">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Gulbeyaz, for the first time in her days,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was much embarrassed, never having met</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In all her life with aught save prayers and praise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as she also risked her life to get</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Him whom she meant to tutor in love’s ways</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Into a comfortable tête-à-tête,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lose the hour would make her quite a martyr,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And they had wasted now almost a quarter.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-123">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I also would suggest the fitting time</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To gentlemen in any such like case,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That is to say in a meridian clime⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With us there is more law given to the chase,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But here a small delay forms a great crime:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So recollect that the extremest grace</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is just two minutes for your declaration⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A moment more would hurt your reputation.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-124">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan’s was good; and might have been still better,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he had got Haidée into his head:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>However strange, he could not yet forget her,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which made him seem exceedingly ill-bred.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gulbeyaz, who looked on him as her debtor</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For having had him to her palace led,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Began to blush up to the eyes, and then</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Grow deadly pale, and then blush back again.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-125">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>At length, in an imperial way, she laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her hand on his, and bending on him eyes</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which needed not an empire to persuade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Looked into his for love, where none replies:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her brow grew black, but she would not upbraid,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That being the last thing a proud woman tries;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She rose, and pausing one chaste moment threw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Herself upon his breast, and there she grew.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-126">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This was an awkward test, as Juan found,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But he was steeled by Sorrow, Wrath, and Pride:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With gentle force her white arms he unwound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And seated her all drooping by his side,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then rising haughtily he glanced around,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking coldly in her face he cried,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“The prisoned eagle will not pair, nor I</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Serve a Sultana’s sensual fantasy.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-127">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Thou ask’st, if I can love? be this the proof</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How much I <em>have</em> loved⁠—that I love not <em>thee</em>!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In this vile garb, the distaff, web, and woof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Were fitter for me: Love is for the free!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I am not dazzled by this splendid roof;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whate’er thy power, and great it seems to be,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Heads bow, knees bend, eyes watch around a throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And hands obey⁠—our hearts are still our own.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-128">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This was a truth to us extremely trite;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Not so to her, who ne’er had heard such things:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She deemed her least command must yield delight,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Earth being only made for Queens and Kings.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If hearts lay on the left side or the right</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">She hardly knew, to such perfection brings</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Legitimacy its born votaries, when</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Aware of their due royal rights o’er men.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-129">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Besides, as has been said, she was so fair</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As even in a much humbler lot had made</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A kingdom or confusion anywhere,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And also, as may be presumed, she laid</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Some stress on charms, which seldom are, if e’er,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By their possessors thrown into the shade:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thought hers gave a double “right divine;”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And half of that opinion’s also mine.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-130">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Remember, or (if you can not) imagine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ye! who have kept your chastity when young,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>While some more desperate dowager has been waging</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Love with you, and been in the dog-days stung<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-486" id="noteref-486" epub:type="noteref">486</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>By your refusal, recollect her raging!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or recollect all that was said or sung</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On such a subject; then suppose the face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of a young downright beauty in this case!</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-131">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Suppose⁠—but you already have supposed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The spouse of Potiphar, the Lady Booby,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-487" id="noteref-487" epub:type="noteref">487</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Phaedra,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-488" id="noteref-488" epub:type="noteref">488</a> and all which story has disclosed</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of good examples; pity that so few by</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Poets and private tutors are exposed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-489" id="noteref-489" epub:type="noteref">489</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To educate⁠—ye youth of Europe⁠—you by!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But when you have supposed the few we know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You can’t suppose Gulbeyaz’ angry brow.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-132">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A tigress robbed of young, a lioness,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or any interesting beast of prey,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Are similes at hand for the distress</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of ladies who can <em>not</em> have their own way;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But though my turn will not be served with less,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">These don’t express one half what I should say:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For what is stealing young ones, few or many,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To cutting short their hope of having <em>any</em>?</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-133">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The love of offspring’s Nature’s general law,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From tigresses and cubs to ducks and ducklings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There’s nothing whets the beak, or arms the claw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like an invasion of their babes and sucklings;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And all who have seen a human nursery, saw</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">How mothers love their children’s squalls and chucklings:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This strong extreme effect (to tire no longer</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your patience) shows the cause must still be stronger.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-490" id="noteref-490" epub:type="noteref">490</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-134">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If I said fire flashed from Gulbeyaz’ eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Twere nothing⁠—for her eyes flashed always fire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or said her cheeks assumed the deepest dyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I should but bring disgrace upon the dyer,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So supernatural was her passion’s rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For ne’er till now she knew a checked desire:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Even ye who know what a checked woman is</span>
					<br/>
					<span>(Enough, God knows!) would much fall short of this.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-135">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her rage was but a minute’s, and ’twas well⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A moment’s more had slain her; but the while</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It lasted ’twas like a short glimpse of Hell:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nought’s more sublime than energetic bile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Though horrible to see, yet grand to tell,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Ocean warring ’gainst a rocky isle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And the deep passions flashing through her form</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Made her a beautiful embodied storm.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-136">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A vulgar tempest ’twere to a typhoon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To match a common fury with her rage,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And yet she did not want to reach the moon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-491" id="noteref-491" epub:type="noteref">491</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like moderate Hotspur on the immortal page;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-492" id="noteref-492" epub:type="noteref">492</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her anger pitched into a lower tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps the fault of her soft sex and age⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her wish was but to “kill, kill, kill,” like Lear’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-493" id="noteref-493" epub:type="noteref">493</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then her thirst of blood was quenched in tears.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-137">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A storm it raged, and like the storm it passed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Passed without words⁠—in fact she could not speak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then her sex’s shame<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-494" id="noteref-494" epub:type="noteref">494</a> broke in at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A sentiment till then in her but weak,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But now it flowed in natural and fast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As water through an unexpected leak;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For she felt humbled⁠—and humiliation</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is sometimes good for people in her station.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-138">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>It teaches them that they are flesh and blood,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It also gently hints to them that others,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although of clay, are yet not quite of mud;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That urns and pipkins are but fragile brothers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And works of the same pottery, bad or good,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though not all born of the same sires and mothers;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It teaches⁠—Heaven knows only what it teaches,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But sometimes it may mend, and often reaches.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-139">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXXXIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Her first thought was to cut off Juan’s head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her second, to cut only his⁠—acquaintance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her third, to ask him where he had been bred;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her fourth, to rally him into repentance;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her fifth, to call her maids and go to bed;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Her sixth, to stab herself; her seventh, to sentence</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lash to Baba:⁠—but her grand resource</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Was to sit down again, and cry⁠—of course.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-140">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>She thought to stab herself, but then she had</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The dagger close at hand, which made it awkward;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For Eastern stays are little made to pad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So that a poniard pierces if ’tis struck hard:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She thought of killing Juan⁠—but, poor lad!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though he deserved it well for being so backward,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The cutting off his head was not the art</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Most likely to attain her aim⁠—his heart.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-141">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Juan was moved: he had made up his mind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To be impaled, or quartered as a dish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For dogs, or to be slain with pangs refined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or thrown to lions, or made baits for fish,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus heroically stood resigned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Rather than sin⁠—except to his own wish:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But all his great preparatives for dying</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Dissolved like snow before a woman crying.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-142">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>As through his palms Bob Acres’ valour oozed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-495" id="noteref-495" epub:type="noteref">495</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">So Juan’s virtue ebbed, I know not how;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And first he wondered why he had refused;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then, if matters could be made up now;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And next his savage virtue he accused,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as a friar may accuse his vow,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or as a dame repents her of her oath,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which mostly ends in some small breach of both.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-143">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>So he began to stammer some excuses;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But words are not enough in such a matter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although you borrowed all that e’er the Muses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have sung, or even a Dandy’s dandiest chatter,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Or all the figures Castlereagh abuses;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-496" id="noteref-496" epub:type="noteref">496</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Just as a languid smile began to flatter</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His peace was making, but, before he ventured</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Further, old Baba rather briskly entered.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-144">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Bride of the Sun! and Sister of the Moon!”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(’Twas thus he spake,) “and Empress of the Earth!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whose frown would put the spheres all out of tune,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Whose smile makes all the planets dance with mirth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your slave brings tidings⁠—he hopes not too soon⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Which your sublime attention may be worth:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sun himself has sent me like a ray,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To hint that he is coming up this way.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-145">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Is it,” exclaimed Gulbeyaz, “as you say?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">I wish to heaven he would not shine till morning!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But bid my women form the milky way.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Hence, my old comet! give the stars due warning⁠—<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-497" id="noteref-497" epub:type="noteref">497</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, Christian! mingle with them as you may,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And as you’d have me pardon your past scorning⁠—”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Here they were interrupted by a humming</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sound, and then by a cry, “The Sultan’s coming!”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-146">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>First came her damsels, a decorous file,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And then his Highness’ eunuchs, black and white;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The train might reach a quarter of a mile:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His Majesty was always so polite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As to announce his visits a long while</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Before he came, especially at night;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For being the last wife of the Emperor,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>She was of course the favourite of the four.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-147">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His Highness was a man of solemn port,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shawled to the nose, and bearded to the eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Snatched from a prison to preside at court,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">His lately bowstrung brother caused his rise;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He was as good a sovereign of the sort</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As any mentioned in the histories</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of Cantemir, or Knōllěs, where few shine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-498" id="noteref-498" epub:type="noteref">498</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Save Solyman, the glory of their line.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-499" id="noteref-499" epub:type="noteref">499</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-148">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He went to mosque in state, and said his prayers</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With more than “Oriental scrupulosity;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-500" id="noteref-500" epub:type="noteref">500</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>He left to his vizier all state affairs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And showed but little royal curiosity:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I know not if he had domestic cares⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No process proved connubial animosity;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Four wives and twice five hundred maids, unseen,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Were ruled as calmly as a Christian queen.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-501" id="noteref-501" epub:type="noteref">501</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-149">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CXLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If now and then there happened a slight slip,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Little was heard of criminal or crime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The story scarcely passed a single lip⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sack and sea had settled all in time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>From which the secret nobody could rip:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The public knew no more than does this rhyme;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No scandals made the daily press a curse⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Morals were better, and the fish no worse.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-502" id="noteref-502" epub:type="noteref">502</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-150">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CL</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He saw with his own eyes the moon was round,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was also certain that the earth was square,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Because he had journeyed fifty miles, and found</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">No sign that it was circular anywhere;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-503" id="noteref-503" epub:type="noteref">503</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>His empire also was without a bound:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis true, a little troubled here and there,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>By rebel pachas, and encroaching giaours,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But then they never came to “the Seven Towers;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-504" id="noteref-504" epub:type="noteref">504</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-151">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Except in shape of envoys, who were sent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To lodge there when a war broke out, according</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To the true law of nations, which ne’er meant</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Those scoundrels, who have never had a sword in</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their dirty diplomatic hands, to vent</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Their spleen in making strife, and safely wording</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their lies, yclept despatches, without risk or</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The singeing of a single inky whisker.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-152">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He had fifty daughters and four dozen sons,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of whom all such as came of age were stowed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The former in a palace, where like nuns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">They lived till some Bashaw was sent abroad,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When she, whose turn it was, was wed at once,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Sometimes at six years old<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-505" id="noteref-505" epub:type="noteref">505</a>⁠—though this seems odd,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis true; the reason is, that the Bashaw</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Must make a present to his sire-in-law.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-153">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His sons were kept in prison, till they grew</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of years to fill a bowstring or the throne,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One or the other, but which of the two</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Could yet be known unto the fates alone;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meantime the education they went through</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Was princely, as the proofs have always shown;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So that the heir apparent still was found</span>
					<br/>
					<span>No less deserving to be hanged than crowned.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-154">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His Majesty saluted his fourth spouse</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the ceremonies of his rank,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who cleared her sparkling eyes and smoothed her brows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">As suits a matron who has played a prank;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>These must seem doubly mindful of their vows,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To save the credit of their breaking bank:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To no men are such cordial greetings given</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As those whose wives have made them fit for Heaven.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-506" id="noteref-506" epub:type="noteref">506</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-155">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>His Highness cast around his great black eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And looking, as he always looked, perceived</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Juan amongst the damsels in disguise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At which he seemed no whit surprised nor grieved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But just remarked with air sedate and wise,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-507" id="noteref-507" epub:type="noteref">507</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While still a fluttering sigh Gulbeyaz heaved,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I see you’ve bought another girl; ’tis pity</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That a mere Christian should be half so pretty.”</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-156">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>This compliment, which drew all eyes upon</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The new-bought virgin, made her blush and shake.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Her comrades, also, thought themselves undone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Oh! Muhammad! that his Majesty should take</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Such notice of a giaour, while scarce to one</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of them his lips imperial ever spake!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There was a general whisper, toss, and wriggle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But etiquette forbade them all to giggle.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-157">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>The Turks do well to shut⁠—at least, sometimes⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The women up⁠—because, in sad reality,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their chastity in these unhappy climes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-508" id="noteref-508" epub:type="noteref">508</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Is not a thing of that astringent quality</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which in the North prevents precocious crimes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes our snow less pure than our morality;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The Sun, which yearly melts the polar ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has quite the contrary effect⁠—on vice.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-158">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLVIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus in the East they are extremely strict,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And wedlock and a padlock mean the same:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Excepting only when the former’s picked</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">It ne’er can be replaced in proper frame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spoilt, as a pipe of claret is when pricked:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But then their own polygamy’s to blame;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Why don’t they knead two virtuous souls for life</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into that moral centaur, man and wife?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-509" id="noteref-509" epub:type="noteref">509</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="stanza-5-159">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">CLIX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Thus far our chronicle; and now we pause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Though not for want of matter; but ’tis time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>According to the ancient epic laws,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To slacken sail, and anchor with our rhyme.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let this fifth canto meet with due applause,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The sixth shall have a touch of the sublime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Meanwhile, as Homer sometimes sleeps, perhaps</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’ll pardon to my muse a few short naps.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-510" id="noteref-510" epub:type="noteref">510</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<footer>
				<p>End of Canto 5th. Finished Ravenna, <time datetime="1820-11-27"><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 27th 1820</time>.<br/>
				Begun <time datetime="1820-10-16"><abbr>Oct.</abbr> 16, 1820</time><br/>
				and finished copying out, <time datetime="1820-12-26"><abbr>Dec.</abbr> 26</time><br/>
				with some intermediate additions, 1820.</p>
				<p>
					<abbr epub:type="z3998:surname">B.</abbr>
				</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
