<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="canto-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="label">Canto</span>
				<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_14">[14]</a>
			</h2>
			<h3>I.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I want a hero: an uncommon want,</p>
					<p class="i2">When every year and month sends forth a new one,</p>
					<p>Till, after cloying the gazettes with cant,</p>
					<p class="i2">The age discovers he is not the true one;</p>
					<p>Of such as these I should not care to vaunt,</p>
					<p class="i2">I'll therefore take our ancient friend Don Juan—</p>
					<p>We all have seen him, in the pantomime,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_15">[15]</a></p>
					<p>Sent to the Devil somewhat ere his time.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>II.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Vernon,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_16">[16]</a> the butcher Cumberland, Wolfe, Hawke,</p>
					<p class="i2">Prince Ferdinand, Granby, Burgoyne, Keppel, Howe,</p>
					<p>Evil and good, have had their tithe of talk,</p>
					<p class="i2">And filled their sign-posts then, like Wellesley now;</p>
					<p>Each in their turn like Banquo's monarchs stalk,</p>
					<p class="i2">Followers of Fame, "nine farrow"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_17">[17]</a> of that sow:</p>
					<p>France, too, had Buonaparté<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_18">[18]</a> and Dumourier<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_19">[19]</a></p>
					<p>Recorded in the Moniteur and Courier.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>III.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Barnave, Brissot, Condorcet, Mirabeau,</p>
					<p class="i2">Petion, Clootz, Danton, Marat, La Fayette<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_20">[20]</a></p>
					<p>Were French, and famous people, as we know;</p>
					<p class="i2">And there were others, scarce forgotten yet,</p>
					<p>Joubert, Hoche, Marceau, Lannes, Desaix, Moreau,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_21">[21]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">With many of the military set,</p>
					<p>Exceedingly remarkable at times,</p>
					<p>But not at all adapted to my rhymes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Nelson was once Britannia's god of War,</p>
					<p class="i2">And still should be so, but the tide is turned;</p>
					<p>There's no more to be said of Trafalgar,</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is with our hero quietly inurned;</p>
					<p>Because the army's grown more popular,</p>
					<p class="i2">At which the naval people are concerned;</p>
					<p>Besides, the Prince is all for the land-service.</p>
					<p>Forgetting Duncan, Nelson, Howe, and Jervis.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>V.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Brave men were living before Agamemnon<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_22">[22]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And since, exceeding valorous and sage,</p>
					<p>A good deal like him too, though quite the same none;</p>
					<p class="i2">But then they shone not on the poet's page,</p>
					<p>And so have been forgotten:—I condemn none,</p>
					<p class="i2">But can't find any in the present age</p>
					<p>Fit for my poem (that is, for my new one);</p>
					<p>So, as I said, I'll take my friend Don Juan.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Most epic poets plunge <i>"in medias res"</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_23">[23]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">(Horace makes this the heroic turnpike road),</p>
					<p>And then your hero tells, whene'er you please,</p>
					<p class="i2">What went before—by way of episode,</p>
					<p>While seated after dinner at his ease,</p>
					<p class="i2">Beside his mistress in some soft abode,</p>
					<p>Palace, or garden, paradise, or cavern,</p>
					<p>Which serves the happy couple for a tavern.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>That is the usual method, but not mine—</p>
					<p class="i2">My way is to begin with the beginning;</p>
					<p>The regularity of my design</p>
					<p class="i2">Forbids all wandering as the worst of sinning,</p>
					<p>And therefore I shall open with a line</p>
					<p class="i2">(Although it cost me half an hour in spinning),</p>
					<p>Narrating somewhat of Don Juan's father,</p>
					<p>And also of his mother, if you'd rather.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>VIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In Seville was he born, a pleasant city,</p>
					<p class="i2">Famous for oranges and women,—he</p>
					<p>Who has not seen it will be much to pity,</p>
					<p class="i2">So says the proverb<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_24">[24]</a>—and I quite agree;</p>
					<p>Of all the Spanish towns is none more pretty,</p>
					<p class="i2">Cadiz perhaps—but that you soon may see;—</p>
					<p>Don Juan's parents lived beside the river,</p>
					<p>A noble stream, and called the Guadalquivir.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>IX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His father's name was José-<i>Don</i>, of course,—</p>
					<p class="i2">A true Hidalgo, free from every stain</p>
					<p>Of Moor or Hebrew blood, he traced his source</p>
					<p class="i2">Through the most Gothic gentlemen of Spain;</p>
					<p>A better cavalier ne'er mounted horse,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or, being mounted, e'er got down again,</p>
					<p>Than José, who begot our hero, who</p>
					<p>Begot—but that's to come——Well, to renew:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>X.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_25">[25]</a></h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His mother was a learnéd lady, famed</p>
					<p class="i2">For every branch of every science known—</p>
					<p>In every Christian language ever named,</p>
					<p class="i2">With virtues equalled by her wit alone:</p>
					<p>She made the cleverest people quite ashamed,</p>
					<p class="i2">And even the good with inward envy groan,</p>
					<p>Finding themselves so very much exceeded,</p>
					<p>In their own way, by all the things that she did.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her memory was a mine: she knew by heart</p>
					<p class="i2">All Calderon and greater part of Lopé;</p>
					<p>So, that if any actor missed his part,</p>
					<p class="i2">She could have served him for the prompter's copy;</p>
					<p>For her Feinagle's were an useless art,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_26">[26]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And he himself obliged to shut up shop—he</p>
					<p>Could never make a memory so fine as</p>
					<p>That which adorned the brain of Donna Inez.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her favourite science was the mathematical,</p>
					<p class="i2">Her noblest virtue was her magnanimity,</p>
					<p>Her wit (she sometimes tried at wit) was Attic all,</p>
					<p class="i2">Her serious sayings darkened to sublimity;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_A">[A]</a></p>
					<p>In short, in all things she was fairly what I call</p>
					<p class="i2">A prodigy—her morning dress was dimity,</p>
					<p>Her evening silk, or, in the summer, muslin,</p>
					<p>And other stuffs, with which I won't stay puzzling.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She knew the Latin—that is, "the Lord's prayer,"</p>
					<p class="i2">And Greek—the alphabet—I'm nearly sure;</p>
					<p>She read some French romances here and there,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although her mode of speaking was not pure;</p>
					<p>For native Spanish she had no great care,</p>
					<p class="i2">At least her conversation was obscure;</p>
					<p>Her thoughts were theorems, her words a problem,</p>
					<p>As if she deemed that mystery would ennoble 'em.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She liked the English and the Hebrew tongue,</p>
					<p class="i2">And said there was analogy between 'em;</p>
					<p>She proved it somehow out of sacred song,</p>
					<p class="i2">But I must leave the proofs to those who've seen 'em;</p>
					<p>But this I heard her say, and can't be wrong,</p>
					<p class="i2">And all may think which way their judgments lean 'em,</p>
					<p>"'T is strange—the Hebrew noun which means 'I am,'</p>
					<p>The English always use to govern d—n."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Some women use their tongues—she <i>looked</i> a lecture,</p>
					<p class="i2">Each eye a sermon, and her brow a homily,</p>
					<p>An all-in-all sufficient self-director,</p>
					<p class="i2">Like the lamented late Sir Samuel Romilly,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_27">[27]</a></p>
					<p>The Law's expounder, and the State's corrector,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whose suicide was almost an anomaly—</p>
					<p>One sad example more, that "All is vanity,"—</p>
					<p>(The jury brought their verdict in "Insanity!")</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In short, she was a walking calculation,</p>
					<p class="i2">Miss Edgeworth's novels stepping from their covers,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_28">[28]</a></p>
					<p>Or Mrs. Trimmer's books on education,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_29">[29]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Or "Coelebs' Wife"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_30">[30]</a> set out in quest of lovers,</p>
					<p>Morality's prim personification,</p>
					<p class="i2">In which not Envy's self a flaw discovers;</p>
					<p>To others' share let "female errors fall,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_31">[31]</a></p>
					<p>For she had not even one—the worst of all.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh! she was perfect past all parallel—</p>
					<p class="i2">Of any modern female saint's comparison;</p>
					<p>So far above the cunning powers of Hell,</p>
					<p class="i2">Her Guardian Angel had given up his garrison;</p>
					<p>Even her minutest motions went as well</p>
					<p class="i2">As those of the best time-piece made by Harrison:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_32">[32]</a></p>
					<p>In virtues nothing earthly could surpass her,</p>
					<p>Save thine "incomparable oil," Macassar!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_33">[33]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Perfect she was, but as perfection is</p>
					<p class="i2">Insipid in this naughty world of ours,</p>
					<p>Where our first parents never learned to kiss</p>
					<p class="i2">Till they were exiled from their earlier bowers,</p>
					<p>Where all was peace, and innocence, and bliss,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_B">[B]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">(I wonder how they got through the twelve hours),</p>
					<p>Don José, like a lineal son of Eve,</p>
					<p>Went plucking various fruit without her leave.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He was a mortal of the careless kind,</p>
					<p class="i2">With no great love for learning, or the learned,</p>
					<p>Who chose to go where'er he had a mind,</p>
					<p class="i2">And never dreamed his lady was concerned;</p>
					<p>The world, as usual, wickedly inclined</p>
					<p class="i2">To see a kingdom or a house o'erturned,</p>
					<p>Whispered he had a mistress, some said <i>two</i>.</p>
					<p>But for domestic quarrels <i>one</i> will do.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Now Donna Inez had, with all her merit,</p>
					<p class="i2">A great opinion of her own good qualities;</p>
					<p>Neglect, indeed, requires a saint to bear it,</p>
					<p class="i2">And such, indeed, she was in her moralities;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_C">[C]</a></p>
					<p>But then she had a devil of a spirit,</p>
					<p class="i2">And sometimes mixed up fancies with realities,</p>
					<p>And let few opportunities escape</p>
					<p>Of getting her liege lord into a scrape.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This was an easy matter with a man</p>
					<p class="i2">Oft in the wrong, and never on his guard;</p>
					<p>And even the wisest, do the best they can,</p>
					<p class="i2">Have moments, hours, and days, so unprepared,</p>
					<p>That you might "brain them with their lady's fan;"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_34">[34]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And sometimes ladies hit exceeding hard,</p>
					<p>And fans turn into falchions in fair hands,</p>
					<p>And why and wherefore no one understands.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is pity learnéd virgins ever wed</p>
					<p class="i2">With persons of no sort of education,</p>
					<p>Or gentlemen, who, though well born and bred,</p>
					<p class="i2">Grow tired of scientific conversation:</p>
					<p>I don't choose to say much upon this head,</p>
					<p class="i2">I'm a plain man, and in a single station,</p>
					<p>But—Oh! ye lords of ladies intellectual,</p>
					<p>Inform us truly, have they not hen-pecked you all?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don José and his lady quarrelled—<i>why</i>,</p>
					<p class="i2">Not any of the many could divine,</p>
					<p>Though several thousand people chose to try,</p>
					<p class="i2">'T was surely no concern of theirs nor mine;</p>
					<p>I loathe that low vice—curiosity;</p>
					<p class="i2">But if there's anything in which I shine,</p>
					<p>'T is in arranging all my friends' affairs,</p>
					<p>Not having, of my own, domestic cares.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And so I interfered, and with the best</p>
					<p class="i2">Intentions, but their treatment was not kind;</p>
					<p>I think the foolish people were possessed,</p>
					<p class="i2">For neither of them could I ever find,</p>
					<p>Although their porter afterwards confessed—</p>
					<p class="i2">But that's no matter, and the worst's behind,</p>
					<p>For little Juan o'er me threw, down stairs,</p>
					<p>A pail of housemaid's water unawares.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A little curly-headed, good-for-nothing,</p>
					<p class="i2">And mischief-making monkey from his birth;</p>
					<p>His parents ne'er agreed except in doting</p>
					<p class="i2">Upon the most unquiet imp on earth;</p>
					<p>Instead of quarrelling, had they been but both in</p>
					<p class="i2">Their senses, they'd have sent young master forth</p>
					<p>To school, or had him soundly whipped at home,</p>
					<p>To teach him manners for the time to come.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Don José and the Donna Inez led</p>
					<p class="i2">For some time an unhappy sort of life,</p>
					<p>Wishing each other, not divorced, but dead;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_D">[D]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">They lived respectably as man and wife,</p>
					<p>Their conduct was exceedingly well-bred,</p>
					<p class="i2">And gave no outward signs of inward strife,</p>
					<p>Until at length the smothered fire broke out,</p>
					<p>And put the business past all kind of doubt.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For Inez called some druggists and physicians,</p>
					<p class="i2">And tried to prove her loving lord was <i>mad</i>,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_35">[35]</a></p>
					<p>But as he had some lucid intermissions,</p>
					<p class="i2">She next decided he was only <i>bad</i>;</p>
					<p>Yet when they asked her for her depositions,</p>
					<p class="i2">No sort of explanation could be had,</p>
					<p>Save that her duty both to man and God<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_36">[36]</a></p>
					<p>Required this conduct—which seemed very odd.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_37">[37]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She kept a journal, where his faults were noted,</p>
					<p class="i2">And opened certain trunks of books and letters,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_38">[38]</a></p>
					<p>All which might, if occasion served, be quoted;</p>
					<p class="i2">And then she had all Seville for abettors,</p>
					<p>Besides her good old grandmother (who doted);</p>
					<p class="i2">The hearers of her case became repeaters,</p>
					<p>Then advocates, inquisitors, and judges,</p>
					<p>Some for amusement, others for old grudges.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And then this best and meekest woman bore</p>
					<p class="i2">With such serenity her husband's woes,</p>
					<p>Just as the Spartan ladies did of yore,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who saw their spouses killed, and nobly chose</p>
					<p>Never to say a word about them more—</p>
					<p class="i2">Calmly she heard each calumny that rose,</p>
					<p>And saw <i>his</i> agonies with such sublimity,</p>
					<p>That all the world exclaimed, "What magnanimity!"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>No doubt this patience, when the world is damning us,</p>
					<p class="i2">Is philosophic in our former friends;</p>
					<p>'T is also pleasant to be deemed magnanimous,</p>
					<p class="i2">The more so in obtaining our own ends;</p>
					<p>And what the lawyers call a <i>"malus animus"</i></p>
					<p class="i2">Conduct like this by no means comprehends:</p>
					<p>Revenge in person's certainly no virtue,</p>
					<p>But then 't is not <i>my</i> fault, if <i>others</i> hurt you.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And if our quarrels should rip up old stories,</p>
					<p class="i2">And help them with a lie or two additional,</p>
					<p><i>I</i>'m not to blame, as you well know—no more is</p>
					<p class="i2">Any one else—they were become traditional;</p>
					<p>Besides, their resurrection aids our glories</p>
					<p class="i2">By contrast, which is what we just were wishing all:</p>
					<p>And Science profits by this resurrection—</p>
					<p>Dead scandals form good subjects for dissection.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Their friends had tried at reconciliation,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_E">[E]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Then their relations, who made matters worse.</p>
					<p>('T were hard to tell upon a like occasion</p>
					<p class="i2">To whom it may be best to have recourse—</p>
					<p>I can't say much for friend or yet relation)</p>
					<p class="i2">The lawyers did their utmost for divorce,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_F">[F]</a></p>
					<p>But scarce a fee was paid on either side</p>
					<p>Before, unluckily, Don José died.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He died: and most unluckily, because,</p>
					<p class="i2">According to all hints I could collect</p>
					<p>From Counsel learnéd in those kinds of laws,</p>
					<p class="i2">(Although their talk's obscure and circumspect)</p>
					<p>His death contrived to spoil a charming cause;</p>
					<p class="i2">A thousand pities also with respect</p>
					<p>To public feeling, which on this occasion</p>
					<p>Was manifested in a great sensation.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But ah! he died; and buried with him lay</p>
					<p class="i2">The public feeling and the lawyers' fees:</p>
					<p>His house was sold, his servants sent away,</p>
					<p class="i2">A Jew took one of his two mistresses,</p>
					<p>A priest the other—at least so they say:</p>
					<p class="i2">I asked the doctors after his disease—</p>
					<p>He died of the slow fever called the tertian,</p>
					<p>And left his widow to her own aversion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Yet José was an honourable man,</p>
					<p class="i2">That I must say, who knew him very well;</p>
					<p>Therefore his frailties I'll no further scan,</p>
					<p class="i2">Indeed there were not many more to tell:</p>
					<p>And if his passions now and then outran</p>
					<p class="i2">Discretion, and were not so peaceable</p>
					<p>As Numa's (who was also named Pompilius),</p>
					<p>He had been ill brought up, and was born bilious.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_G">[G]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Whate'er might be his worthlessness or worth,</p>
					<p class="i2">Poor fellow! he had many things to wound him.</p>
					<p>Let's own—since it can do no good on earth—<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_H">[H]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">It was a trying moment that which found him</p>
					<p>Standing alone beside his desolate hearth,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where all his household gods lay shivered round him:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_39">[39]</a></p>
					<p>No choice was left his feelings or his pride,</p>
					<p>Save Death or Doctors' Commons—so he died.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_I">[I]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Dying intestate, Juan was sole heir</p>
					<p class="i2">To a chancery suit, and messuages, and lands,</p>
					<p>Which, with a long minority and care,</p>
					<p class="i2">Promised to turn out well in proper hands:</p>
					<p>Inez became sole guardian, which was fair,</p>
					<p class="i2">And answered but to Nature's just demands;</p>
					<p>An only son left with an only mother</p>
					<p>Is brought up much more wisely than another.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sagest of women, even of widows, she</p>
					<p class="i2">Resolved that Juan should be quite a paragon,</p>
					<p>And worthy of the noblest pedigree,</p>
					<p class="i2">(His Sire was of Castile, his Dam from Aragon)</p>
					<p>Then, for accomplishments of chivalry,</p>
					<p class="i2">In case our Lord the King should go to war again,</p>
					<p>He learned the arts of riding, fencing, gunnery,</p>
					<p>And how to scale a fortress—or a nunnery.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But that which Donna Inez most desired,</p>
					<p class="i2">And saw into herself each day before all</p>
					<p>The learnéd tutors whom for him she hired,</p>
					<p class="i2">Was, that his breeding should be strictly moral:</p>
					<p>Much into all his studies she inquired,</p>
					<p class="i2">And so they were submitted first to her, all,</p>
					<p>Arts, sciences—no branch was made a mystery</p>
					<p>To Juan's eyes, excepting natural history.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The languages, especially the dead,</p>
					<p class="i2">The sciences, and most of all the abstruse,</p>
					<p>The arts, at least all such as could be said</p>
					<p class="i2">To be the most remote from common use,</p>
					<p>In all these he was much and deeply read:</p>
					<p class="i2">But not a page of anything that's loose,</p>
					<p>Or hints continuation of the species,</p>
					<p>Was ever suffered, lest he should grow vicious.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>His classic studies made a little puzzle,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because of filthy loves of gods and goddesses,</p>
					<p>Who in the earlier ages raised a bustle,</p>
					<p class="i2">But never put on pantaloons or bodices;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_40">[40]</a></p>
					<p>His reverend tutors had at times a tussle,</p>
					<p class="i2">And for their Æneids, Iliads, and Odysseys,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_J">[J]</a></p>
					<p>Were forced to make an odd sort of apology,</p>
					<p>For Donna Inez dreaded the Mythology.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Ovid's a rake, as half his verses show him,</p>
					<p class="i2">Anacreon's morals are a still worse sample,</p>
					<p>Catullus scarcely has a decent poem,</p>
					<p class="i2">I don't think Sappho's Ode a good example,</p>
					<p>Although Longinus<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_41">[41]</a> tells us there is no hymn</p>
					<p class="i2">Where the Sublime soars forth on wings more ample;</p>
					<p>But Virgil's songs are pure, except that horrid one</p>
					<p>Beginning with <i>"Formosum Pastor Corydon."</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_42">[42]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lucretius' irreligion is too strong</p>
					<p class="i2">For early stomachs, to prove wholesome food;</p>
					<p>I can't help thinking Juvenal was wrong,</p>
					<p class="i2">Although no doubt his real intent was good,</p>
					<p>For speaking out so plainly in his song,</p>
					<p class="i2">So much indeed as to be downright rude;</p>
					<p>And then what proper person can be partial</p>
					<p>To all those nauseous epigrams of Martial?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan was taught from out the best edition,</p>
					<p class="i2">Expurgated by learned men, who place,</p>
					<p>Judiciously, from out the schoolboy's vision,</p>
					<p class="i2">The grosser parts; but, fearful to deface</p>
					<p>Too much their modest bard by this omission,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_K">[K]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And pitying sore his mutilated case,</p>
					<p>They only add them all in an appendix,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_43">[43]</a></p>
					<p>Which saves, in fact, the trouble of an index;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For there we have them all "at one fell swoop,"</p>
					<p class="i2">Instead of being scattered through the pages;</p>
					<p>They stand forth marshalled in a handsome troop,</p>
					<p class="i2">To meet the ingenuous youth of future ages,</p>
					<p>Till some less rigid editor shall stoop</p>
					<p class="i2">To call them back into their separate cages,</p>
					<p>Instead of standing staring all together,</p>
					<p>Like garden gods—and not so decent either.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Missal too (it was the family Missal)</p>
					<p class="i2">Was ornamented in a sort of way</p>
					<p>Which ancient mass-books often are, and this all</p>
					<p class="i2">Kinds of grotesques illumined; and how they,</p>
					<p>Who saw those figures on the margin kiss all,</p>
					<p class="i2">Could turn their optics to the text and pray,</p>
					<p>Is more than I know—But Don Juan's mother</p>
					<p>Kept this herself, and gave her son another.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sermons he read, and lectures he endured,</p>
					<p class="i2">And homilies, and lives of all the saints;</p>
					<p>To Jerome and to Chrysostom inured,</p>
					<p class="i2">He did not take such studies for restraints;</p>
					<p>But how Faith is acquired, and then insured,</p>
					<p class="i2">So well not one of the aforesaid paints</p>
					<p>As Saint Augustine in his fine Confessions,</p>
					<p>Which make the reader envy his transgressions.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_44">[44]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This, too, was a sealed book to little Juan—</p>
					<p class="i2">I can't but say that his mamma was right,</p>
					<p>If such an education was the true one.</p>
					<p class="i2">She scarcely trusted him from out her sight;</p>
					<p>Her maids were old, and if she took a new one,</p>
					<p class="i2">You might be sure she was a perfect fright;</p>
					<p>She did this during even her husband's life—</p>
					<p>I recommend as much to every wife.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Young Juan waxed in goodliness and grace;</p>
					<p class="i2">At six a charming child, and at eleven</p>
					<p>With all the promise of as fine a face</p>
					<p class="i2">As e'er to Man's maturer growth was given:</p>
					<p>He studied steadily, and grew apace,</p>
					<p class="i2">And seemed, at least, in the right road to Heaven,</p>
					<p>For half his days were passed at church, the other</p>
					<p>Between his tutors, confessor, and mother.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>L.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At six, I said, he was a charming child,</p>
					<p class="i2">At twelve he was a fine, but quiet boy;</p>
					<p>Although in infancy a little wild,</p>
					<p class="i2">They tamed him down amongst them: to destroy</p>
					<p>His natural spirit not in vain they toiled,</p>
					<p class="i2">At least it seemed so; and his mother's joy</p>
					<p>Was to declare how sage, and still, and steady,</p>
					<p>Her young philosopher was grown already.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I had my doubts, perhaps I have them still,</p>
					<p class="i2">But what I say is neither here nor there:</p>
					<p>I knew his father well, and have some skill</p>
					<p class="i2">In character—but it would not be fair</p>
					<p>From sire to son to augur good or ill:</p>
					<p class="i2">He and his wife were an ill-sorted pair—</p>
					<p>But scandal's my aversion—I protest</p>
					<p>Against all evil speaking, even in jest.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For my part I say nothing—nothing—but</p>
					<p class="i2"><i>This</i> I will say—my reasons are my own—</p>
					<p>That if I had an only son to put</p>
					<p class="i2">To school (as God be praised that I have none),</p>
					<p>'T is not with Donna Inez I would shut</p>
					<p class="i2">Him up to learn his catechism alone,</p>
					<p>No—no—I'd send him out betimes to college,</p>
					<p>For there it was I picked up my own knowledge.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>For there one learns—'t is not for me to boast,</p>
					<p class="i2">Though I acquired—but I pass over <i>that</i>,</p>
					<p>As well as all the Greek I since have lost:</p>
					<p class="i2">I say that there's the place—but "<i>Verbum sat</i>,"</p>
					<p>I think I picked up too, as well as most,</p>
					<p class="i2">Knowledge of matters—but no matter <i>what</i>—</p>
					<p>I never married—but, I think, I know</p>
					<p>That sons should not be educated so.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Young Juan now was sixteen years of age,</p>
					<p class="i2">Tall, handsome, slender, but well knit: he seemed</p>
					<p>Active, though not so sprightly, as a page;</p>
					<p class="i2">And everybody but his mother deemed</p>
					<p>Him almost man; but she flew in a rage<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_45">[45]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And bit her lips (for else she might have screamed)</p>
					<p>If any said so—for to be precocious</p>
					<p>Was in her eyes a thing the most atrocious.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Amongst her numerous acquaintance, all</p>
					<p class="i2">Selected for discretion and devotion,</p>
					<p>There was the Donna Julia, whom to call</p>
					<p class="i2">Pretty were but to give a feeble notion</p>
					<p>Of many charms in her as natural</p>
					<p class="i2">As sweetness to the flower, or salt to Ocean,</p>
					<p>Her zone to Venus, or his bow to Cupid,</p>
					<p>(But this last simile is trite and stupid.)</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The darkness of her Oriental eye</p>
					<p class="i2">Accorded with her Moorish origin;</p>
					<p>(Her blood was not all Spanish; by the by,</p>
					<p class="i2">In Spain, you know, this is a sort of sin;)</p>
					<p>When proud Granada fell, and, forced to fly,</p>
					<p class="i2">Boabdil wept:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_46">[46]</a> of Donna Julia's kin</p>
					<p>Some went to Africa, some stayed in Spain—</p>
					<p>Her great great grandmamma chose to remain.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She married (I forget the pedigree)</p>
					<p class="i2">With an Hidalgo, who transmitted down</p>
					<p>His blood less noble than such blood should be;</p>
					<p class="i2">At such alliances his sires would frown,</p>
					<p>In that point so precise in each degree</p>
					<p class="i2">That they bred <i>in and in</i>, as might be shown,</p>
					<p>Marrying their cousins—nay, their aunts, and nieces,</p>
					<p>Which always spoils the breed, if it increases.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This heathenish cross restored the breed again,</p>
					<p class="i2">Ruined its blood, but much improved its flesh;</p>
					<p>For from a root the ugliest in Old Spain</p>
					<p class="i2">Sprung up a branch as beautiful as fresh;</p>
					<p>The sons no more were short, the daughters plain:</p>
					<p class="i2">But there's a rumour which I fain would hush,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_L">[L]</a></p>
					<p>'T is said that Donna Julia's grandmamma</p>
					<p>Produced her Don more heirs at love than law.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>However this might be, the race went on</p>
					<p class="i2">Improving still through every generation,</p>
					<p>Until it centred in an only son,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who left an only daughter; my narration</p>
					<p>May have suggested that this single one</p>
					<p class="i2">Could be but Julia (whom on this occasion</p>
					<p>I shall have much to speak about), and she</p>
					<p>Was married, charming, chaste, and twenty-three.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her eye (I'm very fond of handsome eyes)</p>
					<p class="i2">Was large and dark, suppressing half its fire</p>
					<p>Until she spoke, then through its soft disguise</p>
					<p class="i2">Flashed an expression more of pride than ire,</p>
					<p>And love than either; and there would arise</p>
					<p class="i2">A something in them which was not desire,</p>
					<p>But would have been, perhaps, but for the soul</p>
					<p>Which struggled through and chastened down the whole.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her glossy hair was clustered o'er a brow</p>
					<p class="i2">Bright with intelligence, and fair, and smooth;</p>
					<p>Her eyebrow's shape was like the aërial bow,</p>
					<p class="i2">Her cheek all purple with the beam of youth,</p>
					<p>Mounting, at times, to a transparent glow,</p>
					<p class="i2">As if her veins ran lightning; she, in sooth,</p>
					<p>Possessed an air and grace by no means common:</p>
					<p>Her stature tall—I hate a dumpy woman.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Wedded she was some years, and to a man</p>
					<p class="i2">Of fifty, and such husbands are in plenty;</p>
					<p>And yet, I think, instead of such a ONE</p>
					<p class="i2">'T were better to have TWO of five-and-twenty,</p>
					<p>Especially in countries near the sun:</p>
					<p class="i2">And now I think on 't, "<i>mi vien in mente</i>",</p>
					<p>Ladies even of the most uneasy virtue</p>
					<p>Prefer a spouse whose age is short of thirty.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_M">[M]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is a sad thing, I cannot choose but say,</p>
					<p class="i2">And all the fault of that indecent sun,</p>
					<p>Who cannot leave alone our helpless clay,</p>
					<p class="i2">But will keep baking, broiling, burning on,</p>
					<p>That howsoever people fast and pray,</p>
					<p class="i2">The flesh is frail, and so the soul undone:</p>
					<p>What men call gallantry, and gods adultery,</p>
					<p>Is much more common where the climate's sultry,</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Happy the nations of the moral North!</p>
					<p class="i2">Where all is virtue, and the winter season</p>
					<p>Sends sin, without a rag on, shivering forth</p>
					<p class="i2">('T was snow that brought St. Anthony<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_47">[47]</a> to reason);</p>
					<p>Where juries cast up what a wife is worth,</p>
					<p class="i2">By laying whate'er sum, in mulct, they please on</p>
					<p>The lover, who must pay a handsome price,</p>
					<p>Because it is a marketable vice.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Alfonso was the name of Julia's lord,</p>
					<p class="i2">A man well looking for his years, and who</p>
					<p>Was neither much beloved nor yet abhorred:</p>
					<p class="i2">They lived together as most people do,</p>
					<p>Suffering each other's foibles by accord,</p>
					<p class="i2">And not exactly either <i>one</i> or <i>two</i>;</p>
					<p>Yet he was jealous, though he did not show it,</p>
					<p>For Jealousy dislikes the world to know it.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Julia was—yet I never could see why—</p>
					<p class="i2">With Donna Inez quite a favourite friend;</p>
					<p>Between their tastes there was small sympathy,</p>
					<p class="i2">For not a line had Julia ever penned:</p>
					<p>Some people whisper (but, no doubt, they lie,</p>
					<p class="i2">For Malice still imputes some private end)</p>
					<p>That Inez had, ere Don Alfonso's marriage,</p>
					<p>Forgot with him her very prudent carriage;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And that still keeping up the old connection,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which Time had lately rendered much more chaste,</p>
					<p>She took his lady also in affection,</p>
					<p class="i2">And certainly this course was much the best:</p>
					<p>She flattered Julia with her sage protection,</p>
					<p class="i2">And complimented Don Alfonso's taste;</p>
					<p>And if she could not (who can?) silence scandal,</p>
					<p>At least she left it a more slender handle.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I can't tell whether Julia saw the affair</p>
					<p class="i2">With other people's eyes, or if her own</p>
					<p>Discoveries made, but none could be aware</p>
					<p class="i2">Of this, at least no symptom e'er was shown;</p>
					<p>Perhaps she did not know, or did not care,</p>
					<p class="i2">Indifferent from the first, or callous grown:</p>
					<p>I'm really puzzled what to think or say,</p>
					<p>She kept her counsel in so close a way.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Juan she saw, and, as a pretty child,</p>
					<p class="i2">Caressed him often—such a thing might be</p>
					<p>Quite innocently done, and harmless styled,</p>
					<p class="i2">When she had twenty years, and thirteen he;</p>
					<p>But I am not so sure I should have smiled</p>
					<p class="i2">When he was sixteen, Julia twenty-three;</p>
					<p>These few short years make wondrous alterations,</p>
					<p>Particularly amongst sun-burnt nations.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Whate'er the cause might be, they had become</p>
					<p class="i2">Changed; for the dame grew distant, the youth shy,</p>
					<p>Their looks cast down, their greetings almost dumb,</p>
					<p class="i2">And much embarrassment in either eye;</p>
					<p>There surely will be little doubt with some</p>
					<p class="i2">That Donna Julia knew the reason why,</p>
					<p>But as for Juan, he had no more notion</p>
					<p>Than he who never saw the sea of Ocean.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Yet Julia's very coldness still was kind,</p>
					<p class="i2">And tremulously gentle her small hand</p>
					<p>Withdrew itself from his, but left behind</p>
					<p class="i2">A little pressure, thrilling, and so bland</p>
					<p>And slight, so very slight, that to the mind</p>
					<p class="i2">'T was but a doubt; but ne'er magician's wand</p>
					<p>Wrought change with all Armida's<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_48">[48]</a> fairy art</p>
					<p>Like what this light touch left on Juan's heart.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And if she met him, though she smiled no more,</p>
					<p class="i2">She looked a sadness sweeter than her smile,</p>
					<p>As if her heart had deeper thoughts in store</p>
					<p class="i2">She must not own, but cherished more the while</p>
					<p>For that compression in its burning core;</p>
					<p class="i2">Even Innocence itself has many a wile,</p>
					<p>And will not dare to trust itself with truth,</p>
					<p>And Love is taught hypocrisy from youth.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Passion most dissembles, yet betrays</p>
					<p class="i2">Even by its darkness; as the blackest sky</p>
					<p>Foretells the heaviest tempest, it displays</p>
					<p class="i2">Its workings through the vainly guarded eye,</p>
					<p>And in whatever aspect it arrays</p>
					<p class="i2">Itself, 't is still the same hypocrisy;</p>
					<p>Coldness or Anger, even Disdain or Hate,</p>
					<p>Are masks it often wears, and still too late.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Then there were sighs, the deeper for suppression,</p>
					<p class="i2">And stolen glances, sweeter for the theft,</p>
					<p>And burning blushes, though for no transgression,</p>
					<p class="i2">Tremblings when met, and restlessness when left;</p>
					<p>All these are little preludes to possession,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of which young Passion cannot be bereft,</p>
					<p>And merely tend to show how greatly Love is</p>
					<p>Embarrassed at first starting with a novice.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Poor Julia's heart was in an awkward state;</p>
					<p class="i2">She felt it going, and resolved to make</p>
					<p>The noblest efforts for herself and mate,</p>
					<p class="i2">For Honour's, Pride's, Religion's, Virtue's sake:</p>
					<p>Her resolutions were most truly great,</p>
					<p class="i2">And almost might have made a Tarquin quake:</p>
					<p>She prayed the Virgin Mary for her grace,</p>
					<p>As being the best judge of a lady's case.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_49">[49]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She vowed she never would see Juan more,</p>
					<p class="i2">And next day paid a visit to his mother,</p>
					<p>And looked extremely at the opening door,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which, by the Virgin's grace, let in another;</p>
					<p>Grateful she was, and yet a little sore—</p>
					<p class="i2">Again it opens, it can be no other,</p>
					<p>'T is surely Juan now—No! I'm afraid</p>
					<p>That night the Virgin was no further prayed.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_50">[50]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She now determined that a virtuous woman</p>
					<p class="i2">Should rather face and overcome temptation,</p>
					<p>That flight was base and dastardly, and no man</p>
					<p class="i2">Should ever give her heart the least sensation,</p>
					<p>That is to say, a thought beyond the common</p>
					<p class="i2">Preference, that we must feel, upon occasion,</p>
					<p>For people who are pleasanter than others,</p>
					<p>But then they only seem so many brothers.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And even if by chance—and who can tell?</p>
					<p class="i2">The Devil's so very sly—she should discover</p>
					<p>That all within was not so very well,</p>
					<p class="i2">And, if still free, that such or such a lover</p>
					<p>Might please perhaps, a virtuous wife can quell</p>
					<p class="i2">Such thoughts, and be the better when they're over;</p>
					<p>And if the man should ask, 't is but denial:</p>
					<p>I recommend young ladies to make trial.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And, then, there are such things as Love divine,</p>
					<p class="i2">Bright and immaculate, unmixed and pure,</p>
					<p>Such as the angels think so very fine,</p>
					<p class="i2">And matrons, who would be no less secure,</p>
					<p>Platonic, perfect, "just such love as mine;"</p>
					<p class="i2">Thus Julia said—and thought so, to be sure;</p>
					<p>And so I'd have her think, were <i>I</i> the man</p>
					<p>On whom her reveries celestial ran.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Such love is innocent, and may exist</p>
					<p class="i2">Between young persons without any danger.</p>
					<p>A hand may first, and then a lip be kissed;</p>
					<p class="i2">For my part, to such doings I'm a stranger,</p>
					<p>But <i>hear</i> these freedoms form the utmost list</p>
					<p class="i2">Of all o'er which such love may be a ranger:</p>
					<p>If people go beyond, 't is quite a crime,</p>
					<p>But not my fault—I tell them all in time.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Love, then, but Love within its proper limits,</p>
					<p class="i2">Was Julia's innocent determination</p>
					<p>In young Don Juan's favour, and to him its</p>
					<p class="i2">Exertion might be useful on occasion;</p>
					<p>And, lighted at too pure a shrine to dim its</p>
					<p class="i2">Ethereal lustre, with what sweet persuasion</p>
					<p>He might be taught, by Love and her together—</p>
					<p>I really don't know what, nor Julia either.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Fraught with this fine intention, and well fenced</p>
					<p class="i2">In mail of proof—her purity of soul<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_51">[51]</a>—</p>
					<p>She, for the future, of her strength convinced,</p>
					<p class="i2">And that her honour was a rock, or mole,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_N">[N]</a></p>
					<p>Exceeding sagely from that hour dispensed</p>
					<p class="i2">With any kind of troublesome control;</p>
					<p>But whether Julia to the task was equal</p>
					<p>Is that which must be mentioned in the sequel.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Her plan she deemed both innocent and feasible,</p>
					<p class="i2">And, surely, with a stripling of sixteen</p>
					<p>Not Scandal's fangs could fix on much that's seizable,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or if they did so, satisfied to mean</p>
					<p>Nothing but what was good, her breast was peaceable—</p>
					<p class="i2">A quiet conscience makes one so serene!</p>
					<p>Christians have burnt each other, quite persuaded</p>
					<p>That all the Apostles would have done as they did.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And if in the mean time her husband died,</p>
					<p class="i2">But Heaven forbid that such a thought should cross</p>
					<p>Her brain, though in a dream! (and then she sighed)</p>
					<p class="i2">Never could she survive that common loss;</p>
					<p>But just suppose that moment should betide,</p>
					<p class="i2">I only say suppose it—<i>inter nos</i>:</p>
					<p>(This should be <i>entre nous</i>, for Julia thought</p>
					<p>In French, but then the rhyme would go for nought.)</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I only say, suppose this supposition:</p>
					<p class="i2">Juan being then grown up to man's estate</p>
					<p>Would fully suit a widow of condition,</p>
					<p class="i2">Even seven years hence it would not be too late;</p>
					<p>And in the interim (to pursue this vision)</p>
					<p class="i2">The mischief, after all, could not be great,</p>
					<p>For he would learn the rudiments of Love,</p>
					<p>I mean the <i>seraph</i> way of those above.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>So much for Julia! Now we'll turn to Juan.</p>
					<p class="i2">Poor little fellow! he had no idea</p>
					<p>Of his own case, and never hit the true one;</p>
					<p class="i2">In feelings quick as Ovid's Miss Medea,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_52">[52]</a></p>
					<p>He puzzled over what he found a new one,</p>
					<p class="i2">But not as yet imagined it could be a</p>
					<p>Thing quite in course, and not at all alarming,</p>
					<p>Which, with a little patience, might grow charming.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Silent and pensive, idle, restless, slow,</p>
					<p class="i2">His home deserted for the lonely wood,</p>
					<p>Tormented with a wound he could not know,</p>
					<p class="i2">His, like all deep grief, plunged in solitude:</p>
					<p>I'm fond myself of solitude or so,</p>
					<p class="i2">But then, I beg it may be understood,</p>
					<p>By solitude I mean a Sultan's (not</p>
					<p>A Hermit's), with a haram for a grot.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Oh Love! in such a wilderness as this,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where Transport and Security entwine,</p>
					<p>Here is the Empire of thy perfect bliss,</p>
					<p class="i2">And here thou art a God indeed divine."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_53">[53]</a></p>
					<p>The bard I quote from does not sing amiss,</p>
					<p class="i2">With the exception of the second line,</p>
					<p>For that same twining "Transport and Security"</p>
					<p>Are twisted to a phrase of some obscurity.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>LXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Poet meant, no doubt, and thus appeals</p>
					<p class="i2">To the good sense and senses of mankind,</p>
					<p>The very thing which everybody feels,</p>
					<p class="i2">As all have found on trial, or may find,</p>
					<p>That no one likes to be disturbed at meals</p>
					<p class="i2">Or love.—I won't say more about "entwined"</p>
					<p>Or "Transport," as we knew all that before,</p>
					<p>But beg "Security" will bolt the door.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Young Juan wandered by the glassy brooks,</p>
					<p class="i2">Thinking unutterable things; he threw</p>
					<p>Himself at length within the leafy nooks</p>
					<p class="i2">Where the wild branch of the cork forest grew;</p>
					<p>There poets find materials for their books,</p>
					<p class="i2">And every now and then we read them through,</p>
					<p>So that their plan and prosody are eligible,</p>
					<p>Unless, like Wordsworth, they prove unintelligible.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He, Juan (and not Wordsworth), so pursued</p>
					<p class="i2">His self-communion with his own high soul,</p>
					<p>Until his mighty heart, in its great mood,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had mitigated part, though not the whole</p>
					<p>Of its disease; he did the best he could</p>
					<p class="i2">With things not very subject to control,</p>
					<p>And turned, without perceiving his condition,</p>
					<p>Like Coleridge, into a metaphysician.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_54">[54]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He thought about himself, and the whole earth,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of man the wonderful, and of the stars,</p>
					<p>And how the deuce they ever could have birth:</p>
					<p class="i2">And then he thought of earthquakes, and of wars,</p>
					<p>How many miles the moon might have in girth,</p>
					<p class="i2">Of air-balloons, and of the many bars</p>
					<p>To perfect knowledge of the boundless skies;—</p>
					<p>And then he thought of Donna Julia's eyes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>In thoughts like these true Wisdom may discern</p>
					<p class="i2">Longings sublime, and aspirations high,</p>
					<p>Which some are born with, but the most part learn</p>
					<p class="i2">To plague themselves withal, they know not why:</p>
					<p>'T was strange that one so young should thus concern</p>
					<p class="i2">His brain about the action of the sky;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_O">[O]</a></p>
					<p>If <i>you</i> think 't was Philosophy that this did,</p>
					<p>I can't help thinking puberty assisted.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He pored upon the leaves, and on the flowers,</p>
					<p class="i2">And heard a voice in all the winds; and then</p>
					<p>He thought of wood-nymphs and immortal bowers,</p>
					<p class="i2">And how the goddesses came down to men:</p>
					<p>He missed the pathway, he forgot the hours,</p>
					<p class="i2">And when he looked upon his watch again,</p>
					<p>He found how much old Time had been a winner—</p>
					<p>He also found that he had lost his dinner.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sometimes he turned to gaze upon his book,</p>
					<p class="i2">Boscan,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_55">[55]</a> or Garcilasso;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_56">[56]</a>—by the wind</p>
					<p>Even as the page is rustled while we look,</p>
					<p class="i2">So by the poesy of his own mind</p>
					<p>Over the mystic leaf his soul was shook,</p>
					<p class="i2">As if 't were one whereon magicians bind</p>
					<p>Their spells, and give them to the passing gale,</p>
					<p>According to some good old woman's tale.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thus would he while his lonely hours away</p>
					<p class="i2">Dissatisfied, not knowing what he wanted;</p>
					<p>Nor glowing reverie, nor poet's lay,</p>
					<p class="i2">Could yield his spirit that for which it panted,</p>
					<p>A bosom whereon he his head might lay,</p>
					<p class="i2">And hear the heart beat with the love it granted,</p>
					<p>With——several other things, which I forget,</p>
					<p>Or which, at least, I need not mention yet.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Those lonely walks, and lengthening reveries,</p>
					<p class="i2">Could not escape the gentle Julia's eyes;</p>
					<p>She saw that Juan was not at his ease;</p>
					<p class="i2">But that which chiefly may, and must surprise,</p>
					<p>Is, that the Donna Inez did not tease</p>
					<p class="i2">Her only son with question or surmise;</p>
					<p>Whether it was she did not see, or would not,</p>
					<p>Or, like all very clever people, could not.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This may seem strange, but yet 't is very common;</p>
					<p class="i2">For instance—gentlemen, whose ladies take</p>
					<p>Leave to o'erstep the written rights of Woman,</p>
					<p class="i2">And break the——Which commandment is 't they break?</p>
					<p>(I have forgot the number, and think no man</p>
					<p class="i2">Should rashly quote, for fear of a mistake;)</p>
					<p>I say, when these same gentlemen are jealous,</p>
					<p>They make some blunder, which their ladies tell us.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>XCIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A real husband always is suspicious,</p>
					<p class="i2">But still no less suspects in the wrong place,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_P">[P]</a></p>
					<p>Jealous of some one who had no such wishes,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or pandering blindly to his own disgrace,</p>
					<p>By harbouring some dear friend extremely vicious;</p>
					<p class="i2">The last indeed's infallibly the case:</p>
					<p>And when the spouse and friend are gone off wholly,</p>
					<p>He wonders at their vice, and not his folly.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>C.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thus parents also are at times short-sighted:</p>
					<p class="i2">Though watchful as the lynx, they ne'er discover,</p>
					<p>The while the wicked world beholds delighted,</p>
					<p class="i2">Young Hopeful's mistress, or Miss Fanny's lover,</p>
					<p>Till some confounded escapade has blighted</p>
					<p class="i2">The plan of twenty years, and all is over;</p>
					<p>And then the mother cries, the father swears,</p>
					<p>And wonders why the devil he got heirs.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Inez was so anxious, and so clear</p>
					<p class="i2">Of sight, that I must think, on this occasion,</p>
					<p>She had some other motive much more near</p>
					<p class="i2">For leaving Juan to this new temptation,</p>
					<p>But what that motive was, I sha'n't say here;</p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps to finish Juan's education,</p>
					<p>Perhaps to open Don Alfonso's eyes,</p>
					<p>In case he thought his wife too great a prize.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>It was upon a day, a summer's day;—</p>
					<p class="i2">Summer's indeed a very dangerous season,</p>
					<p>And so is spring about the end of May;</p>
					<p class="i2">The sun, no doubt, is the prevailing reason;</p>
					<p>But whatsoe'er the cause is, one may say,</p>
					<p class="i2">And stand convicted of more truth than treason,</p>
					<p>That there are months which nature grows more merry in,—</p>
					<p>March has its hares, and May must have its heroine.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T was on a summer's day—the sixth of June:</p>
					<p class="i2">I like to be particular in dates,</p>
					<p>Not only of the age, and year, but moon;</p>
					<p class="i2">They are a sort of post-house, where the Fates</p>
					<p>Change horses, making History change its tune,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_Q">[Q]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Then spur away o'er empires and o'er states,</p>
					<p>Leaving at last not much besides chronology,</p>
					<p>Excepting the post-obits of theology.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_R">[R]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T was on the sixth of June, about the hour</p>
					<p class="i2">Of half-past six—perhaps still nearer seven—</p>
					<p>When Julia sate within as pretty a bower</p>
					<p class="i2">As e'er held houri in that heathenish heaven</p>
					<p>Described by Mahomet, and Anacreon Moore,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_57">[57]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">To whom the lyre and laurels have been given,</p>
					<p>With all the trophies of triumphant song—</p>
					<p>He won them well, and may he wear them long!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She sate, but not alone; I know not well</p>
					<p class="i2">How this same interview had taken place,</p>
					<p>And even if I knew, I should not tell—</p>
					<p class="i2">People should hold their tongues in any case;</p>
					<p>No matter how or why the thing befell,</p>
					<p class="i2">But there were she and Juan, face to face—</p>
					<p>When two such faces are so, 't would be wise,</p>
					<p>But very difficult, to shut their eyes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>How beautiful she looked! her conscious heart</p>
					<p class="i2">Glowed in her cheek, and yet she felt no wrong:</p>
					<p>Oh Love! how perfect is thy mystic art,</p>
					<p class="i2">Strengthening the weak, and trampling on the strong!</p>
					<p>How self-deceitful is the sagest part</p>
					<p class="i2">Of mortals whom thy lure hath led along!—</p>
					<p>The precipice she stood on was immense,</p>
					<p>So was her creed in her own innocence.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_S">[S]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She thought of her own strength, and Juan's youth,</p>
					<p class="i2">And of the folly of all prudish fears,</p>
					<p>Victorious Virtue, and domestic Truth,</p>
					<p class="i2">And then of Don Alfonso's fifty years:</p>
					<p>I wish these last had not occurred, in sooth,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because that number rarely much endears,</p>
					<p>And through all climes, the snowy and the sunny,</p>
					<p>Sounds ill in love, whate'er it may in money.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>When people say, "I've told you <i>fifty</i> times,"</p>
					<p class="i2">They mean to scold, and very often do;</p>
					<p>When poets say, "I've written <i>fifty</i> rhymes,"</p>
					<p class="i2">They make you dread that they 'll recite them too;</p>
					<p>In gangs of <i>fifty</i>, thieves commit their crimes;</p>
					<p class="i2">At <i>fifty</i> love for love is rare, 't is true,</p>
					<p>But then, no doubt, it equally as true is,</p>
					<p>A good deal may be bought for <i>fifty</i> Louis.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Julia had honour, virtue, truth, and love</p>
					<p class="i2">For Don Alfonso; and she inly swore,</p>
					<p>By all the vows below to Powers above,</p>
					<p class="i2">She never would disgrace the ring she wore,</p>
					<p>Nor leave a wish which wisdom might reprove;</p>
					<p class="i2">And while she pondered this, besides much more,</p>
					<p>One hand on Juan's carelessly was thrown,</p>
					<p>Quite by mistake—she thought it was her own;</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Unconsciously she leaned upon the other,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which played within the tangles of her hair;</p>
					<p>And to contend with thoughts she could not smother</p>
					<p class="i2">She seemed by the distraction of her air.</p>
					<p>'T was surely very wrong in Juan's mother</p>
					<p class="i2">To leave together this imprudent pair,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_T">[T]</a></p>
					<p>She who for many years had watched her son so—</p>
					<p>I'm very certain <i>mine</i> would not have done so.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The hand which still held Juan's, by degrees</p>
					<p class="i2">Gently, but palpably confirmed its grasp,</p>
					<p>As if it said, "Detain me, if you please;"</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet there's no doubt she only meant to clasp</p>
					<p>His fingers with a pure Platonic squeeze;</p>
					<p class="i2">She would have shrunk as from a toad, or asp,</p>
					<p>Had she imagined such a thing could rouse</p>
					<p>A feeling dangerous to a prudent spouse.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I cannot know what Juan thought of this,</p>
					<p class="i2">But what he did, is much what you would do;</p>
					<p>His young lip thanked it with a grateful kiss,</p>
					<p class="i2">And then, abashed at its own joy, withdrew</p>
					<p>In deep despair, lest he had done amiss,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Love is so very timid when 't is new:</p>
					<p>She blushed, and frowned not, but she strove to speak,</p>
					<p>And held her tongue, her voice was grown so weak.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The sun set, and up rose the yellow moon:</p>
					<p class="i2">The Devil's in the moon for mischief; they</p>
					<p>Who called her <span class="smcap">chaste</span>, methinks, began too soon</p>
					<p class="i2">Their nomenclature; there is not a day,</p>
					<p>The longest, not the twenty-first of June,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sees half the business in a wicked way,</p>
					<p>On which three single hours of moonshine smile—</p>
					<p>And then she looks so modest all the while!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There is a dangerous silence in that hour,</p>
					<p class="i2">A stillness, which leaves room for the full soul</p>
					<p>To open all itself, without the power</p>
					<p class="i2">Of calling wholly back its self-control;</p>
					<p>The silver light which, hallowing tree and tower,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sheds beauty and deep softness o'er the whole,</p>
					<p>Breathes also to the heart, and o'er it throws</p>
					<p>A loving languor, which is not repose.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Julia sate with Juan, half embraced</p>
					<p class="i2">And half retiring from the glowing arm,</p>
					<p>Which trembled like the bosom where 't was placed;</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet still she must have thought there was no harm,</p>
					<p>Or else 't were easy to withdraw her waist;</p>
					<p class="i2">But then the situation had its charm,</p>
					<p>And then—God knows what next—I can't go on;</p>
					<p>I'm almost sorry that I e'er begun.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh Plato! Plato! you have paved the way,</p>
					<p class="i2">With your confounded fantasies, to more</p>
					<p>Immoral conduct by the fancied sway</p>
					<p class="i2">Your system feigns o'er the controlless core</p>
					<p>Of human hearts, than all the long array</p>
					<p class="i2">Of poets and romancers:—You're a bore,</p>
					<p>A charlatan, a coxcomb—and have been,</p>
					<p>At best, no better than a go-between.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And Julia's voice was lost, except in sighs,</p>
					<p class="i2">Until too late for useful conversation;</p>
					<p>The tears were gushing from her gentle eyes,</p>
					<p class="i2">I wish, indeed, they had not had occasion;</p>
					<p>But who, alas! can love, and then be wise?</p>
					<p class="i2">Not that Remorse did not oppose Temptation;</p>
					<p>A little still she strove, and much repented,</p>
					<p>And whispering "I will ne'er consent"—consented.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is said that Xerxes offered a reward<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_58">[58]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">To those who could invent him a new pleasure:</p>
					<p>Methinks the requisition's rather hard,</p>
					<p class="i2">And must have cost his Majesty a treasure:</p>
					<p>For my part, I'm a moderate-minded bard,</p>
					<p class="i2">Fond of a little love (which I call leisure);</p>
					<p>I care not for new pleasures, as the old</p>
					<p>Are quite enough for me, so they but hold.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Oh Pleasure! you're indeed a pleasant thing,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_59">[59]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Although one must be damned for you, no doubt:</p>
					<p>I make a resolution every spring</p>
					<p class="i2">Of reformation, ere the year run out,</p>
					<p>But somehow, this my vestal vow takes wing,</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet still, I trust, it may be kept throughout:</p>
					<p>I'm very sorry, very much ashamed,</p>
					<p>And mean, next winter, to be quite reclaimed.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here my chaste Muse a liberty must take—</p>
					<p class="i2">Start not! still chaster reader—she'll be nice hence-</p>
					<p>Forward, and there is no great cause to quake;</p>
					<p class="i2">This liberty is a poetic licence,</p>
					<p>Which some irregularity may make</p>
					<p class="i2">In the design, and as I have a high sense</p>
					<p>Of Aristotle and the Rules, 't is fit</p>
					<p>To beg his pardon when I err a bit.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This licence is to hope the reader will</p>
					<p class="i2">Suppose from June the sixth (the fatal day,</p>
					<p>Without whose epoch my poetic skill</p>
					<p class="i2">For want of facts would all be thrown away),</p>
					<p>But keeping Julia and Don Juan still</p>
					<p class="i2">In sight, that several months have passed; we'll say</p>
					<p>'T was in November, but I'm not so sure</p>
					<p>About the day—the era's more obscure.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>We'll talk of that anon.—'T is sweet to hear</p>
					<p class="i2">At midnight on the blue and moonlit deep</p>
					<p>The song and oar of Adria's gondolier,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_60">[60]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">By distance mellowed, o'er the waters sweep;</p>
					<p>'T is sweet to see the evening star appear;</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is sweet to listen as the night-winds creep</p>
					<p>From leaf to leaf; 't is sweet to view on high</p>
					<p>The rainbow, based on ocean, span the sky.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is sweet to hear the watch-dog's honest bark</p>
					<p class="i2">Bay deep-mouthed welcome as we draw near home;</p>
					<p>'T is sweet to know there is an eye will mark</p>
					<p class="i2">Our coming, and look brighter when we come;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_U">[U]</a></p>
					<p>'T is sweet to be awakened by the lark,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or lulled by falling waters; sweet the hum</p>
					<p>Of bees, the voice of girls, the song of birds,</p>
					<p>The lisp of children, and their earliest words.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sweet is the vintage, when the showering grapes</p>
					<p class="i2">In Bacchanal profusion reel to earth,</p>
					<p>Purple and gushing: sweet are our escapes</p>
					<p class="i2">From civic revelry to rural mirth;</p>
					<p>Sweet to the miser are his glittering heaps,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sweet to the father is his first-born's birth,</p>
					<p>Sweet is revenge—especially to women—</p>
					<p>Pillage to soldiers, prize-money to seamen.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Sweet is a legacy, and passing sweet<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_V">[V]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The unexpected death of some old lady,</p>
					<p>Or gentleman of seventy years complete,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who've made "us youth"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_61">[61]</a> wait too—too long already,</p>
					<p>For an estate, or cash, or country seat,</p>
					<p class="i2">Still breaking, but with stamina so steady,</p>
					<p>That all the Israelites are fit to mob its</p>
					<p>Next owner for their double-damned post-obits.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_W">[W]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is sweet to win, no matter how, one's laurels,</p>
					<p class="i2">By blood or ink; 't is sweet to put an end</p>
					<p>To strife; 't is sometimes sweet to have our quarrels,</p>
					<p class="i2">Particularly with a tiresome friend:</p>
					<p>Sweet is old wine in bottles, ale in barrels;</p>
					<p class="i2">Dear is the helpless creature we defend</p>
					<p>Against the world; and dear the schoolboy spot<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_62">[62]</a></p>
					<p>We ne'er forget, though there we are forgot.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But sweeter still than this, than these, than all,</p>
					<p class="i2">Is first and passionate Love—it stands alone,</p>
					<p>Like Adam's recollection of his fall;</p>
					<p class="i2">The Tree of Knowledge has been plucked—all 's known—</p>
					<p>And Life yields nothing further to recall</p>
					<p class="i2">Worthy of this ambrosial sin, so shown,</p>
					<p>No doubt in fable, as the unforgiven</p>
					<p>Fire which Prometheus filched for us from Heaven.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Man's a strange animal, and makes strange use</p>
					<p class="i2">Of his own nature, and the various arts,</p>
					<p>And likes particularly to produce</p>
					<p class="i2">Some new experiment to show his parts;</p>
					<p>This is the age of oddities let loose,</p>
					<p class="i2">Where different talents find their different marts;</p>
					<p>You'd best begin with truth, and when you've lost your</p>
					<p>Labour, there's a sure market for imposture.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What opposite discoveries we have seen!</p>
					<p class="i2">(Signs of true genius, and of empty pockets.)</p>
					<p>One makes new noses<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_63">[63]</a>, one a guillotine,</p>
					<p class="i2">One breaks your bones, one sets them in their sockets;</p>
					<p>But Vaccination certainly has been</p>
					<p class="i2">A kind antithesis to Congreve's rockets,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_64">[64]</a></p>
					<p>With which the Doctor paid off an old pox,</p>
					<p>By borrowing a new one from an ox.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_65">[65]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Bread has been made (indifferent) from potatoes:</p>
					<p class="i2">And Galvanism has set some corpses grinning,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_66">[66]</a></p>
					<p>But has not answered like the apparatus</p>
					<p class="i2">Of the Humane Society's beginning,</p>
					<p>By which men are unsuffocated gratis:</p>
					<p class="i2">What wondrous new machines have late been spinning!</p>
					<p>I said the small-pox has gone out of late;</p>
					<p>Perhaps it may be followed by the great.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_67">[67]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T is said the great came from America;</p>
					<p class="i2">Perhaps it may set out on its return,—</p>
					<p>The population there so spreads, they say</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is grown high time to thin it in its turn,</p>
					<p>With war, or plague, or famine—any way,</p>
					<p class="i2">So that civilisation they may learn;</p>
					<p>And which in ravage the more loathsome evil is—</p>
					<p>Their real <i>lues,</i> or our pseudo-syphilis?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This is the patent age of new inventions</p>
					<p class="i2">For killing bodies, and for saving souls,</p>
					<p>All propagated with the best intentions:</p>
					<p class="i2">Sir Humphry Davy's lantern,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_68">[68]</a> by which coals</p>
					<p>Are safely mined for in the mode he mentions,</p>
					<p class="i2">Tombuctoo travels,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_69">[69]</a> voyages to the Poles<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_70">[70]</a></p>
					<p>Are ways to benefit mankind, as true,</p>
					<p>Perhaps, as shooting them at Waterloo.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Man's a phenomenon, one knows not what,</p>
					<p class="i2">And wonderful beyond all wondrous measure;</p>
					<p>'T is pity though, in this sublime world, that</p>
					<p class="i2">Pleasure's a sin, and sometimes Sin's a pleasure;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_X">[X]</a></p>
					<p>Few mortals know what end they would be at,</p>
					<p class="i2">But whether Glory, Power, or Love, or Treasure,</p>
					<p>The path is through perplexing ways, and when</p>
					<p>The goal is gained, we die, you know—and then——</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What then?—I do not know, no more do you—</p>
					<p class="i2">And so good night.—Return we to our story:</p>
					<p>'T was in November, when fine days are few,</p>
					<p class="i2">And the far mountains wax a little hoary,</p>
					<p>And clap a white cape on their mantles blue;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_Y">[Y]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And the sea dashes round the promontory,</p>
					<p>And the loud breaker boils against the rock,</p>
					<p>And sober suns must set at five o'clock.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T was, as the watchmen say, a cloudy night;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_Z">[Z]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">No moon, no stars, the wind was low or loud</p>
					<p>By gusts, and many a sparkling hearth was bright</p>
					<p class="i2">With the piled wood, round which the family crowd;</p>
					<p>There's something cheerful in that sort of light,</p>
					<p class="i2">Even as a summer sky's without a cloud:</p>
					<p>I'm fond of fire, and crickets, and all that,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AA">[AA]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_71">[71]</a></p>
					<p>A lobster salad<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_72">[72]</a>, and champagne, and chat.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>'T was midnight—Donna Julia was in bed,</p>
					<p class="i2">Sleeping, most probably,—when at her door</p>
					<p>Arose a clatter might awake the dead,</p>
					<p class="i2">If they had never been awoke before,</p>
					<p>And that they have been so we all have read,</p>
					<p class="i2">And are to be so, at the least, once more;—</p>
					<p>The door was fastened, but with voice and fist</p>
					<p>First knocks were heard, then "Madam—Madam—hist!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"For God's sake, Madam—Madam—here's my master,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_73">[73]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">With more than half the city at his back—</p>
					<p>Was ever heard of such a curst disaster!</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is not my fault—I kept good watch—Alack!</p>
					<p>Do pray undo the bolt a little faster—</p>
					<p class="i2">They're on the stair just now, and in a crack</p>
					<p>Will all be here; perhaps he yet may fly—</p>
					<p>Surely the window's not so <i>very</i> high!"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>By this time Don Alfonso was arrived,</p>
					<p class="i2">With torches, friends, and servants in great number;</p>
					<p>The major part of them had long been wived,</p>
					<p class="i2">And therefore paused not to disturb the slumber</p>
					<p>Of any wicked woman, who contrived</p>
					<p class="i2">By stealth her husband's temples to encumber:</p>
					<p>Examples of this kind are so contagious,</p>
					<p>Were <i>one</i> not punished, <i>all</i> would be outrageous.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I can't tell how, or why, or what suspicion</p>
					<p class="i2">Could enter into Don Alfonso's head;</p>
					<p>But for a cavalier of his condition</p>
					<p class="i2">It surely was exceedingly ill-bred,</p>
					<p>Without a word of previous admonition,</p>
					<p class="i2">To hold a levee round his lady's bed,</p>
					<p>And summon lackeys, armed with fire and sword,</p>
					<p>To prove himself the thing he most abhorred.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Poor Donna Julia! starting as from sleep,</p>
					<p class="i2">(Mind—that I do not say—she had not slept),</p>
					<p>Began at once to scream, and yawn, and weep;</p>
					<p class="i2">Her maid, Antonia, who was an adept,</p>
					<p>Contrived to fling the bed-clothes in a heap,</p>
					<p class="i2">As if she had just now from out them crept:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AB">[AB]</a></p>
					<p>I can't tell why she should take all this trouble</p>
					<p>To prove her mistress had been sleeping double.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Julia mistress, and Antonia maid,</p>
					<p class="i2">Appeared like two poor harmless women, who</p>
					<p>Of goblins, but still more of men afraid,</p>
					<p class="i2">Had thought one man might be deterred by two,</p>
					<p>And therefore side by side were gently laid,</p>
					<p class="i2">Until the hours of absence should run through,</p>
					<p>And truant husband should return, and say,</p>
					<p>"My dear,—I was the first who came away."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Now Julia found at length a voice, and cried,</p>
					<p class="i2">"In Heaven's name, Don Alfonso, what d' ye mean?</p>
					<p>Has madness seized you? would that I had died</p>
					<p class="i2">Ere such a monster's victim I had been!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AC">[AC]</a></p>
					<p>What may this midnight violence betide,</p>
					<p class="i2">A sudden fit of drunkenness or spleen?</p>
					<p>Dare you suspect me, whom the thought would kill?</p>
					<p>Search, then, the room!"—Alfonso said, "I will."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p><i>He</i> searched, <i>they</i> searched, and rummaged everywhere,</p>
					<p class="i2">Closet and clothes' press, chest and window-seat,</p>
					<p>And found much linen, lace, and several pair</p>
					<p class="i2">Of stockings, slippers, brushes, combs, complete,</p>
					<p>With other articles of ladies fair,</p>
					<p class="i2">To keep them beautiful, or leave them neat:</p>
					<p>Arras they pricked and curtains with their swords,</p>
					<p>And wounded several shutters, and some boards.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Under the bed they searched, and there they found—</p>
					<p class="i2">No matter what—it was not that they sought;</p>
					<p>They opened windows, gazing if the ground</p>
					<p class="i2">Had signs or footmarks, but the earth said nought;</p>
					<p>And then they stared each others' faces round:</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is odd, not one of all these seekers thought,</p>
					<p>And seems to me almost a sort of blunder,</p>
					<p>Of looking <i>in</i> the bed as well as under.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>During this inquisition Julia's tongue<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AD">[AD]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Was not asleep—"Yes, search and search," she cried,</p>
					<p>"Insult on insult heap, and wrong on wrong!</p>
					<p class="i2">It was for this that I became a bride!</p>
					<p>For this in silence I have suffered long</p>
					<p class="i2">A husband like Alfonso at my side;</p>
					<p>But now I'll bear no more, nor here remain,</p>
					<p>If there be law or lawyers in all Spain.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Yes, Don Alfonso! husband now no more,</p>
					<p class="i2">If ever you indeed deserved the name,</p>
					<p>Is 't worthy of your years?—you have threescore—</p>
					<p class="i2">Fifty, or sixty, it is all the same—</p>
					<p>Is 't wise or fitting, causeless to explore</p>
					<p class="i2">For facts against a virtuous woman's fame?</p>
					<p>Ungrateful, perjured, barbarous Don Alfonso,</p>
					<p>How dare you think your lady would go on so?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Is it for this I have disdained to hold</p>
					<p class="i2">The common privileges of my sex?</p>
					<p>That I have chosen a confessor so old</p>
					<p class="i2">And deaf, that any other it would vex,</p>
					<p>And never once he has had cause to scold,</p>
					<p class="i2">But found my very innocence perplex</p>
					<p>So much, he always doubted I was married—</p>
					<p>How sorry you will be when I've miscarried!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Was it for this that no Cortejo<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_74">[74]</a> e'er</p>
					<p class="i2">I yet have chosen from out the youth of Seville?</p>
					<p>Is it for this I scarce went anywhere,</p>
					<p class="i2">Except to bull-fights, mass, play, rout, and revel?</p>
					<p>Is it for this, whate'er my suitors were,</p>
					<p class="i2">I favoured none—nay, was almost uncivil?</p>
					<p>Is it for this that General Count O'Reilly,</p>
					<p>Who took Algiers,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_75">[75]</a> declares I used him vilely?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Did not the Italian <i>Musico</i> Cazzani</p>
					<p class="i2">Sing at my heart six months at least in vain?</p>
					<p>Did not his countryman, Count Corniani,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_76">[76]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Call me the only virtuous wife in Spain?</p>
					<p>Were there not also Russians, English, many?</p>
					<p class="i2">The Count Strongstroganoff I put in pain,</p>
					<p>And Lord Mount Coffeehouse, the Irish peer,</p>
					<p>Who killed himself for love (with wine) last year.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CL.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Have I not had two bishops at my feet?</p>
					<p class="i2">The Duke of Ichar, and Don Fernan Nunez;</p>
					<p>And is it thus a faithful wife you treat?</p>
					<p class="i2">I wonder in what quarter now the moon is:</p>
					<p>I praise your vast forbearance not to beat</p>
					<p class="i2">Me also, since the time so opportune is—</p>
					<p>Oh, valiant man! with sword drawn and cocked trigger,</p>
					<p>Now, tell me, don't you cut a pretty figure?</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Was it for this you took your sudden journey,</p>
					<p class="i2">Under pretence of business indispensable</p>
					<p>With that sublime of rascals your attorney,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whom I see standing there, and looking sensible</p>
					<p>Of having played the fool? though both I spurn, he</p>
					<p class="i2">Deserves the worst, his conduct's less defensible,</p>
					<p>Because, no doubt, 't was for his dirty fee,</p>
					<p>And not from any love to you nor me.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"If he comes here to take a deposition,</p>
					<p class="i2">By all means let the gentleman proceed;</p>
					<p>You've made the apartment in a fit condition:—</p>
					<p class="i2">There's pen and ink for you, sir, when you need—</p>
					<p>Let everything be noted with precision,</p>
					<p class="i2">I would not you for nothing should be fee'd—</p>
					<p>But, as my maid's undressed, pray turn your spies out."</p>
					<p>"Oh!" sobbed Antonia, "I could tear their eyes out."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"There is the closet, there the toilet, there</p>
					<p class="i2">The antechamber—search them under, over;</p>
					<p>There is the sofa, there the great arm-chair,</p>
					<p class="i2">The chimney—which would really hold a lover.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AE">[AE]</a></p>
					<p>I wish to sleep, and beg you will take care</p>
					<p class="i2">And make no further noise, till you discover</p>
					<p>The secret cavern of this lurking treasure—</p>
					<p>And when 't is found, let me, too, have that pleasure.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"And now, Hidalgo! now that you have thrown</p>
					<p class="i2">Doubt upon me, confusion over all,</p>
					<p>Pray have the courtesy to make it known</p>
					<p class="i2"><i>Who</i> is the man you search for? how d' ye call</p>
					<p>Him? what's his lineage? let him but be shown—</p>
					<p class="i2">I hope he's young and handsome—is he tall?</p>
					<p>Tell me—and be assured, that since you stain</p>
					<p>My honour thus, it shall not be in vain.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"At least, perhaps, he has not sixty years,</p>
					<p class="i2">At that age he would be too old for slaughter,</p>
					<p>Or for so young a husband's jealous fears—</p>
					<p class="i2">(Antonia! let me have a glass of water.)</p>
					<p>I am ashamed of having shed these tears,</p>
					<p class="i2">They are unworthy of my father's daughter;</p>
					<p>My mother dreamed not in my natal hour,</p>
					<p>That I should fall into a monster's power.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Perhaps 't is of Antonia you are jealous,</p>
					<p class="i2">You saw that she was sleeping by my side,</p>
					<p>When you broke in upon us with your fellows:</p>
					<p class="i2">Look where you please—we've nothing, sir, to hide;</p>
					<p>Only another time, I trust, you'll tell us,</p>
					<p class="i2">Or for the sake of decency abide</p>
					<p>A moment at the door, that we may be</p>
					<p>Dressed to receive so much good company.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"And now, sir, I have done, and say no more;</p>
					<p class="i2">The little I have said may serve to show</p>
					<p>The guileless heart in silence may grieve o'er<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AF">[AF]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The wrongs to whose exposure it is slow:—</p>
					<p>I leave you to your conscience as before,</p>
					<p class="i2">'T will one day ask you <i>why</i> you used me so?</p>
					<p>God grant you feel not then the bitterest grief!—</p>
					<p>Antonia! where's my pocket-handkerchief?"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She ceased, and turned upon her pillow; pale</p>
					<p class="i2">She lay, her dark eyes flashing through their tears,</p>
					<p>Like skies that rain and lighten; as a veil,</p>
					<p class="i2">Waved and o'ershading her wan cheek, appears</p>
					<p>Her streaming hair; the black curls strive, but fail</p>
					<p class="i2">To hide the glossy shoulder, which uprears</p>
					<p>Its snow through all;—her soft lips lie apart,</p>
					<p>And louder than her breathing beats her heart.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The Senhor Don Alfonso stood confused;</p>
					<p class="i2">Antonia bustled round the ransacked room,</p>
					<p>And, turning up her nose, with looks abused</p>
					<p class="i2">Her master, and his myrmidons, of whom</p>
					<p>Not one, except the attorney, was amused;</p>
					<p class="i2">He, like Achates, faithful to the tomb,</p>
					<p>So there were quarrels, cared not for the cause,</p>
					<p>Knowing they must be settled by the laws.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With prying snub-nose, and small eyes, he stood,</p>
					<p class="i2">Following Antonia's motions here and there,</p>
					<p>With much suspicion in his attitude;</p>
					<p class="i2">For reputations he had little care;</p>
					<p>So that a suit or action were made good,</p>
					<p class="i2">Small pity had he for the young and fair,</p>
					<p>And ne'er believed in negatives, till these</p>
					<p>Were proved by competent false witnesses.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Don Alfonso stood with downcast looks,</p>
					<p class="i2">And, truth to say, he made a foolish figure;</p>
					<p>When, after searching in five hundred nooks,</p>
					<p class="i2">And treating a young wife with so much rigour,</p>
					<p>He gained no point, except some self-rebukes,</p>
					<p class="i2">Added to those his lady with such vigour</p>
					<p>Had poured upon him for the last half-hour,</p>
					<p>Quick, thick, and heavy—as a thunder-shower.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>At first he tried to hammer an excuse,</p>
					<p class="i2">To which the sole reply was tears, and sobs,</p>
					<p>And indications of hysterics, whose</p>
					<p class="i2">Prologue is always certain throes, and throbs,</p>
					<p>Gasps, and whatever else the owners choose:</p>
					<p class="i2">Alfonso saw his wife, and thought of Job's;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_77">[77]</a></p>
					<p>He saw too, in perspective, her relations,</p>
					<p>And then he tried to muster all his patience.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He stood in act to speak, or rather stammer,</p>
					<p class="i2">But sage Antonia cut him short before</p>
					<p>The anvil of his speech received the hammer,</p>
					<p class="i2">With "Pray, sir, leave the room, and say no more,</p>
					<p>Or madam dies."—Alfonso muttered, "D—n her,"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_78">[78]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">But nothing else, the time of words was o'er;</p>
					<p>He cast a rueful look or two, and did,</p>
					<p>He knew not wherefore, that which he was bid.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>With him retired his <i>"posse comitatus,"</i></p>
					<p class="i2">The attorney last, who lingered near the door</p>
					<p>Reluctantly, still tarrying there as late as</p>
					<p class="i2">Antonia let him—not a little sore</p>
					<p>At this most strange and unexplained "<i>hiatus</i>"</p>
					<p class="i2">In Don Alfonso's facts, which just now wore</p>
					<p>An awkward look; as he revolved the case,</p>
					<p>The door was fastened in his legal face.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>No sooner was it bolted, than—Oh Shame!</p>
					<p class="i2">Oh Sin! Oh Sorrow! and Oh Womankind!</p>
					<p>How can you do such things and keep your fame,</p>
					<p class="i2">Unless this world, and t' other too, be blind?</p>
					<p>Nothing so dear as an unfilched good name!</p>
					<p class="i2">But to proceed—for there is more behind:</p>
					<p>With much heartfelt reluctance be it said,</p>
					<p>Young Juan slipped, half-smothered, from the bed.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He had been hid—I don't pretend to say</p>
					<p class="i2">How, nor can I indeed describe the where—</p>
					<p>Young, slender, and packed easily, he lay,</p>
					<p class="i2">No doubt, in little compass, round or square;</p>
					<p>But pity him I neither must nor may</p>
					<p class="i2">His suffocation by that pretty pair;</p>
					<p>'T were better, sure, to die so, than be shut</p>
					<p>With maudlin Clarence in his Malmsey butt.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AG">[AG]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>And, secondly, I pity not, because</p>
					<p class="i2">He had no business to commit a sin,</p>
					<p>Forbid by heavenly, fined by human laws;—</p>
					<p class="i2">At least 't was rather early to begin,</p>
					<p>But at sixteen the conscience rarely gnaws</p>
					<p class="i2">So much as when we call our old debts in</p>
					<p>At sixty years, and draw the accompts of evil,</p>
					<p>And find a deuced balance with the Devil.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AH">[AH]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Of his position I can give no notion:</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is written in the Hebrew Chronicle,</p>
					<p>How the physicians, leaving pill and potion,</p>
					<p class="i2">Prescribed, by way of blister, a young belle,</p>
					<p>When old King David's blood grew dull in motion,</p>
					<p class="i2">And that the medicine answered very well;</p>
					<p>Perhaps 't was in a different way applied,</p>
					<p>For David lived, but Juan nearly died.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What's to be done? Alfonso will be back</p>
					<p class="i2">The moment he has sent his fools away.</p>
					<p>Antonia's skill was put upon the rack,</p>
					<p class="i2">But no device could be brought into play—</p>
					<p>And how to parry the renewed attack?</p>
					<p class="i2">Besides, it wanted but few hours of day:</p>
					<p>Antonia puzzled; Julia did not speak,</p>
					<p>But pressed her bloodless lip to Juan's cheek.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He turned his lip to hers, and with his hand</p>
					<p class="i2">Called back the tangles of her wandering hair;</p>
					<p>Even then their love they could not all command,</p>
					<p class="i2">And half forgot their danger and despair:</p>
					<p>Antonia's patience now was at a stand—</p>
					<p class="i2">"Come, come, 't is no time now for fooling there,"</p>
					<p>She whispered, in great wrath—"I must deposit</p>
					<p>This pretty gentleman within the closet:</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Pray, keep your nonsense for some luckier night—</p>
					<p class="i2"><i>Who</i> can have put my master in this mood?</p>
					<p>What will become on 't—I'm in such a fright,</p>
					<p class="i2">The Devil's in the urchin, and no good—</p>
					<p>Is this a time for giggling? this a plight?</p>
					<p class="i2">Why, don't you know that it may end in blood?</p>
					<p>You'll lose your life, and I shall lose my place,</p>
					<p>My mistress all, for that half-girlish face.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Had it but been for a stout cavalier<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_79">[79]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Of twenty-five or thirty—(come, make haste)</p>
					<p>But for a child, what piece of work is here!</p>
					<p class="i2">I really, madam, wonder at your taste—</p>
					<p>(Come, sir, get in)—my master must be near:</p>
					<p class="i2">There, for the present, at the least, he's fast,</p>
					<p>And if we can but till the morning keep</p>
					<p>Our counsel—(Juan, mind, you must not sleep.)"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Now, Don Alfonso entering, but alone,</p>
					<p class="i2">Closed the oration of the trusty maid:</p>
					<p>She loitered, and he told her to be gone,</p>
					<p class="i2">An order somewhat sullenly obeyed;</p>
					<p>However, present remedy was none,</p>
					<p class="i2">And no great good seemed answered if she staid:</p>
					<p>Regarding both with slow and sidelong view,</p>
					<p>She snuffed the candle, curtsied, and withdrew.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Alfonso paused a minute—then begun</p>
					<p class="i2">Some strange excuses for his late proceeding;</p>
					<p>He would not justify what he had done,</p>
					<p class="i2">To say the best, it was extreme ill-breeding;</p>
					<p>But there were ample reasons for it, none</p>
					<p class="i2">Of which he specified in this his pleading:</p>
					<p>His speech was a fine sample, on the whole,</p>
					<p>Of rhetoric, which the learned call "<i>rigmarole.</i>"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Julia said nought; though all the while there rose</p>
					<p class="i2">A ready answer, which at once enables</p>
					<p>A matron, who her husband's foible knows,</p>
					<p class="i2">By a few timely words to turn the tables,</p>
					<p>Which, if it does not silence, still must pose,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Even if it should comprise a pack of fables;</p>
					<p>'T is to retort with firmness, and when he</p>
					<p>Suspects with <i>one</i>, do you reproach with <i>three</i>.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Julia, in fact, had tolerable grounds,—</p>
					<p class="i2">Alfonso's loves with Inez were well known;</p>
					<p>But whether 't was that one's own guilt confounds—</p>
					<p class="i2">But that can't be, as has been often shown,</p>
					<p>A lady with apologies abounds;—</p>
					<p class="i2">It might be that her silence sprang alone</p>
					<p>From delicacy to Don Juan's ear,</p>
					<p>To whom she knew his mother's fame was dear.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There might be one more motive, which makes two;</p>
					<p class="i2">Alfonso ne'er to Juan had alluded,—</p>
					<p>Mentioned his jealousy, but never who</p>
					<p class="i2">Had been the happy lover, he concluded,</p>
					<p>Concealed amongst his premises; 't is true,</p>
					<p class="i2">His mind the more o'er this its mystery brooded;</p>
					<p>To speak of Inez now were, one may say,</p>
					<p>Like throwing Juan in Alfonso's way.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A hint, in tender cases, is enough;</p>
					<p class="i2">Silence is best: besides, there is a <i>tact</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_80">[80]</a>—</p>
					<p>(That modern phrase appears to me sad stuff,</p>
					<p class="i2">But it will serve to keep my verse compact)—</p>
					<p>Which keeps, when pushed by questions rather rough,</p>
					<p class="i2">A lady always distant from the fact:</p>
					<p>The charming creatures lie with such a grace,</p>
					<p>There's nothing so becoming to the face.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>They blush, and we believe them; at least I</p>
					<p class="i2">Have always done so; 't is of no great use,</p>
					<p>In any case, attempting a reply,</p>
					<p class="i2">For then their eloquence grows quite profuse;</p>
					<p>And when at length they're out of breath, they sigh,</p>
					<p class="i2">And cast their languid eyes down, and let loose</p>
					<p>A tear or two, and then we make it up;</p>
					<p>And then—and then—and then—sit down and sup.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Alfonso closed his speech, and begged her pardon,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which Julia half withheld, and then half granted,</p>
					<p>And laid conditions he thought very hard on,</p>
					<p class="i2">Denying several little things he wanted:</p>
					<p>He stood like Adam lingering near his garden,</p>
					<p class="i2">With useless penitence perplexed and haunted;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AI">[AI]</a></p>
					<p>Beseeching she no further would refuse,</p>
					<p>When, lo! he stumbled o'er a pair of shoes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>A pair of shoes!<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_81">[81]</a>—what then? not much, if they</p>
					<p class="i2">Are such as fit with ladies' feet, but these</p>
					<p>(No one can tell how much I grieve to say)</p>
					<p class="i2">Were masculine; to see them, and to seize,</p>
					<p>Was but a moment's act.—Ah! well-a-day!</p>
					<p class="i2">My teeth begin to chatter, my veins freeze!</p>
					<p>Alfonso first examined well their fashion,</p>
					<p>And then flew out into another passion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>He left the room for his relinquished sword,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Julia instant to the closet flew.</p>
					<p>"Fly, Juan, fly! for Heaven's sake—not a word—</p>
					<p class="i2">The door is open—you may yet slip through</p>
					<p>The passage you so often have explored—</p>
					<p class="i2">Here is the garden-key—Fly—fly—Adieu!</p>
					<p>Haste—haste! I hear Alfonso's hurrying feet—</p>
					<p>Day has not broke—there's no one in the street."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>None can say that this was not good advice,</p>
					<p class="i2">The only mischief was, it came too late;</p>
					<p>Of all experience 't is the usual price,</p>
					<p class="i2">A sort of income-tax laid on by fate:</p>
					<p>Juan had reached the room-door in a trice,</p>
					<p class="i2">And might have done so by the garden-gate,</p>
					<p>But met Alfonso in his dressing-gown,</p>
					<p>Who threatened death—so Juan knocked him down.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Dire was the scuffle, and out went the light;</p>
					<p class="i2">Antonia cried out "Rape!" and Julia "Fire!"</p>
					<p>But not a servant stirred to aid the fight.</p>
					<p class="i2">Alfonso, pommelled to his heart's desire,</p>
					<p>Swore lustily he'd be revenged this night;</p>
					<p class="i2">And Juan, too, blasphemed an octave higher;</p>
					<p>His blood was up: though young, he was a Tartar,</p>
					<p>And not at all disposed to prove a martyr.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Alfonso's sword had dropped ere he could draw it,</p>
					<p class="i2">And they continued battling hand to hand,</p>
					<p>For Juan very luckily ne'er saw it;</p>
					<p class="i2">His temper not being under great command,</p>
					<p>If at that moment he had chanced to claw it,</p>
					<p class="i2">Alfonso's days had not been in the land</p>
					<p>Much longer.—Think of husbands', lovers' lives!</p>
					<p>And how ye may be doubly widows—wives!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Alfonso grappled to detain the foe,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Juan throttled him to get away,</p>
					<p>And blood ('t was from the nose) began to flow;</p>
					<p class="i2">At last, as they more faintly wrestling lay,</p>
					<p>Juan contrived to give an awkward blow,</p>
					<p class="i2">And then his only garment quite gave way;</p>
					<p>He fled, like Joseph, leaving it; but there,</p>
					<p>I doubt, all likeness ends between the pair.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Lights came at length, and men, and maids, who found</p>
					<p class="i2">An awkward spectacle their eyes before;</p>
					<p>Antonia in hysterics, Julia swooned,</p>
					<p class="i2">Alfonso leaning, breathless, by the door;</p>
					<p>Some half-torn drapery scattered on the ground,</p>
					<p class="i2">Some blood, and several footsteps, but no more:</p>
					<p>Juan the gate gained, turned the key about,</p>
					<p>And liking not the inside, locked the out.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Here ends this canto.—Need I sing, or say,</p>
					<p class="i2">How Juan, naked, favoured by the night,</p>
					<p>Who favours what she should not, found his way,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AJ">[AJ]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And reached his home in an unseemly plight?</p>
					<p>The pleasant scandal which arose next day,</p>
					<p class="i2">The nine days' wonder which was brought to light,</p>
					<p>And how Alfonso sued for a divorce,</p>
					<p>Were in the English newspapers, of course.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CLXXXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If you would like to see the whole proceedings,</p>
					<p class="i2">The depositions, and the Cause at full,</p>
					<p>The names of all the witnesses, the pleadings</p>
					<p class="i2">Of Counsel to nonsuit, or to annul,</p>
					<p>There's more than one edition, and the readings</p>
					<p class="i2">Are various, but they none of them are dull:</p>
					<p>The best is that in short-hand ta'en by Gurney,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_82">[82]</a></p>
					<p>Who to Madrid on purpose made a journey.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_83">[83]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But Donna Inez, to divert the train</p>
					<p class="i2">Of one of the most circulating scandals</p>
					<p>That had for centuries been known in Spain,</p>
					<p class="i2">At least since the retirement of the Vandals,</p>
					<p>First vowed (and never had she vowed in vain)</p>
					<p class="i2">To Virgin Mary several pounds of candles;</p>
					<p>And then, by the advice of some old ladies,</p>
					<p>She sent her son to be shipped off from Cadiz.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>She had resolved that he should travel through</p>
					<p class="i2">All European climes, by land or sea,</p>
					<p>To mend his former morals, and get new,</p>
					<p class="i2">Especially in France and Italy—</p>
					<p>(At least this is the thing most people do.)</p>
					<p class="i2">Julia was sent into a convent—she</p>
					<p>Grieved—but, perhaps, her feelings may be better<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AK">[AK]</a></p>
					<p>Shown in the following copy of her Letter:—</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"They tell me 't is decided you depart:</p>
					<p class="i2">'T is wise—'t is well, but not the less a pain;</p>
					<p>I have no further claim on your young heart,</p>
					<p class="i2">Mine is the victim, and would be again:</p>
					<p>To love too much has been the only art</p>
					<p class="i2">I used;—I write in haste, and if a stain</p>
					<p>Be on this sheet, 't is not what it appears;</p>
					<p>My eyeballs burn and throb, but have no tears.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"I loved, I love you, for this love have lost</p>
					<p class="i2">State, station, Heaven, Mankind's, my own esteem,</p>
					<p>And yet can not regret what it hath cost,</p>
					<p class="i2">So dear is still the memory of that dream;</p>
					<p>Yet, if I name my guilt, 't is not to boast,</p>
					<p class="i2">None can deem harshlier of me than I deem:</p>
					<p>I trace this scrawl because I cannot rest—</p>
					<p>I've nothing to reproach, or to request.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Man's love is of man's life a thing apart,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AL">[AL]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">'T is a Woman's whole existence; Man may range</p>
					<p>The Court, Camp, Church, the Vessel, and the Mart;</p>
					<p class="i2">Sword, Gown, Gain, Glory, offer in exchange</p>
					<p>Pride, Fame, Ambition, to fill up his heart,</p>
					<p class="i2">And few there are whom these can not estrange;</p>
					<p>Men have all these resources, We but one,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_84">[84]</a></p>
					<p>To love again, and be again undone."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AM">[AM]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"You will proceed in pleasure, and in pride,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AN">[AN]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">Beloved and loving many; all is o'er</p>
					<p>For me on earth, except some years to hide</p>
					<p class="i2">My shame and sorrow deep in my heart's core:</p>
					<p>These I could bear, but cannot cast aside</p>
					<p class="i2">The passion which still rages as before,—</p>
					<p>And so farewell—forgive me, love me—No,</p>
					<p>That word is idle now—but let it go.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AO">[AO]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"My breast has been all weakness, is so yet;</p>
					<p class="i2">But still I think I can collect my mind;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AP">[AP]</a></p>
					<p>My blood still rushes where my spirit's set,</p>
					<p class="i2">As roll the waves before the settled wind;</p>
					<p>My heart is feminine, nor can forget—</p>
					<p class="i2">To all, except one image, madly blind;</p>
					<p>So shakes the needle, and so stands the pole,</p>
					<p>As vibrates my fond heart to my fixed soul.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AQ">[AQ]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"I have no more to say, but linger still,</p>
					<p class="i2">And dare not set my seal upon this sheet,</p>
					<p>And yet I may as well the task fulfil,</p>
					<p class="i2">My misery can scarce be more complete;</p>
					<p>I had not lived till now, could sorrow kill;</p>
					<p class="i2">Death shuns the wretch who fain the blow would meet,</p>
					<p>And I must even survive this last adieu,</p>
					<p>And bear with life, to love and pray for you!"</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This note was written upon gilt-edged paper</p>
					<p class="i2">With a neat little crow-quill, slight and new;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AR">[AR]</a></p>
					<p>Her small white hand could hardly reach the taper,</p>
					<p class="i2">It trembled as magnetic needles do,</p>
					<p>And yet she did not let one tear escape her;</p>
					<p class="i2">The seal a sun-flower; <i>"Elle vous suit partout,"</i><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_85">[85]</a></p>
					<p>The motto cut upon a white cornelian;</p>
					<p>The wax was superfine, its hue vermilion.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CXCIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>This was Don Juan's earliest scrape; but whether</p>
					<p class="i2">I shall proceed with his adventures is</p>
					<p>Dependent on the public altogether;</p>
					<p class="i2">We'll see, however, what they say to this:</p>
					<p>Their favour in an author's cap's a feather,</p>
					<p class="i2">And no great mischief's done by their caprice;</p>
					<p>And if their approbation we experience,</p>
					<p>Perhaps they'll have some more about a year hence.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CC.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>My poem's epic, and is meant to be</p>
					<p class="i2">Divided in twelve books; each book containing,</p>
					<p>With Love, and War, a heavy gale at sea,</p>
					<p class="i2">A list of ships, and captains, and kings reigning,</p>
					<p>New characters; the episodes are three:<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AS">[AS]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">A panoramic view of Hell's in training,</p>
					<p>After the style of Virgil and of Homer,</p>
					<p>So that my name of Epic's no misnomer.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>All these things will be specified in time,</p>
					<p class="i2">With strict regard to Aristotle's rules,</p>
					<p>The <i>Vade Mecum</i> of the true sublime,</p>
					<p class="i2">Which makes so many poets, and some fools:</p>
					<p>Prose poets like blank-verse, I'm fond of rhyme,</p>
					<p class="i2">Good workmen never quarrel with their tools;</p>
					<p>I've got new mythological machinery,</p>
					<p>And very handsome supernatural scenery.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>There's only one slight difference between</p>
					<p class="i2">Me and my epic brethren gone before,</p>
					<p>And here the advantage is my own, I ween</p>
					<p class="i2">(Not that I have not several merits more,</p>
					<p>But this will more peculiarly be seen);</p>
					<p class="i2">They so embellish, that 't is quite a bore</p>
					<p>Their labyrinth of fables to thread through,</p>
					<p>Whereas this story's actually true.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If any person doubt it, I appeal</p>
					<p class="i2">To History, Tradition, and to Facts,</p>
					<p>To newspapers, whose truth all know and feel,</p>
					<p class="i2">To plays in five, and operas in three acts;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AT">[AT]</a></p>
					<p>All these confirm my statement a good deal,</p>
					<p class="i2">But that which more completely faith exacts</p>
					<p>Is, that myself, and several now in Seville,</p>
					<p><i>Saw</i> Juan's last elopement with the Devil.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If ever I should condescend to prose,</p>
					<p class="i2">I'll write poetical commandments, which</p>
					<p>Shall supersede beyond all doubt all those</p>
					<p class="i2">That went before; in these I shall enrich</p>
					<p>My text with many things that no one knows,</p>
					<p class="i2">And carry precept to the highest pitch:</p>
					<p>I'll call the work "Longinus o'er a Bottle,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AU">[AU]</a></p>
					<p>Or, Every Poet his <i>own</i> Aristotle."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thou shalt believe in Milton, Dryden, Pope;</p>
					<p class="i2">Thou shalt not set up Wordsworth, Coleridge, Southey;</p>
					<p>Because the first is crazed beyond all hope,</p>
					<p class="i2">The second drunk,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_86">[86]</a> the third so quaint and mouthy:</p>
					<p>With Crabbe it may be difficult to cope,</p>
					<p class="i2">And Campbell's Hippocrene is somewhat drouthy:</p>
					<p>Thou shalt not steal from Samuel Rogers, nor</p>
					<p>Commit—flirtation with the muse of Moore.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Thou shalt not covet Mr. Sotheby's Muse,</p>
					<p class="i2">His Pegasus, nor anything that's his;</p>
					<p>Thou shalt not bear false witness like "the Blues"—</p>
					<p class="i2">(There's <i>one</i>, at least, is very fond of this);</p>
					<p>Thou shalt not write, in short, but what I choose:</p>
					<p class="i2">This is true criticism, and you may kiss—</p>
					<p>Exactly as you please, or not,—the rod;</p>
					<p>But if you don't, I'll lay it on, by G—d!</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If any person should presume to assert</p>
					<p class="i2">This story is not moral, first, I pray,</p>
					<p>That they will not cry out before they're hurt,</p>
					<p class="i2">Then that they'll read it o'er again, and say</p>
					<p>(But, doubtless, nobody will be so pert)</p>
					<p class="i2">That this is not a moral tale, though gay:</p>
					<p>Besides, in Canto Twelfth, I mean to show</p>
					<p>The very place where wicked people go.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>If, after all, there should be some so blind</p>
					<p class="i2">To their own good this warning to despise,</p>
					<p>Led by some tortuosity of mind,</p>
					<p class="i2">Not to believe my verse and their own eyes,</p>
					<p>And cry that they "the moral cannot find,"</p>
					<p class="i2">I tell him, if a clergyman, he lies;</p>
					<p>Should captains the remark, or critics, make,</p>
					<p>They also lie too—under a mistake.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>The public approbation I expect,</p>
					<p class="i2">And beg they'll take my word about the moral,</p>
					<p>Which I with their amusement will connect</p>
					<p class="i2">(So children cutting teeth receive a coral);</p>
					<p>Meantime they'll doubtless please to recollect</p>
					<p class="i2">My epical pretensions to the laurel:</p>
					<p>For fear some prudish readers should grow skittish,</p>
					<p>I've bribed my Grandmother's Review—the British.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_87">[87]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I sent it in a letter to the Editor,</p>
					<p class="i2">Who thanked me duly by return of post—</p>
					<p>I'm for a handsome article his creditor;</p>
					<p class="i2">Yet, if my gentle Muse he please to roast,</p>
					<p>And break a promise after having made it her,</p>
					<p class="i2">Denying the receipt of what it cost,</p>
					<p>And smear his page with gall instead of honey,</p>
					<p>All I can say is—that he had the money.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>I think that with this holy <i>new</i> alliance</p>
					<p class="i2">I may ensure the public, and defy</p>
					<p>All other magazines of art or science,</p>
					<p class="i2">Daily, or monthly, or three monthly; I</p>
					<p>Have not essayed to multiply their clients,</p>
					<p class="i2">Because they tell me 't were in vain to try,</p>
					<p>And that the Edinburgh Review and Quarterly</p>
					<p>Treat a dissenting author very martyrly.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"<i>Non ego hoc ferrem calidus juventâ</i></p>
					<p class="i2"><i>Consule Planco</i>"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_88">[88]</a> Horace said, and so</p>
					<p>Say I; by which quotation there is meant a</p>
					<p class="i2">Hint that some six or seven good years ago</p>
					<p>(Long ere I dreamt of dating from the Brenta)</p>
					<p class="i2">I was most ready to return a blow,</p>
					<p>And would not brook at all this sort of thing</p>
					<p>In my hot youth—when George the Third was King.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But now at thirty years my hair is grey—</p>
					<p class="i2">(I wonder what it will be like at forty?</p>
					<p>I thought of a peruke the other day—)<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AV">[AV]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">My heart is not much greener; and, in short, I</p>
					<p>Have squandered my whole summer while 't was May,</p>
					<p class="i2">And feel no more the spirit to retort; I</p>
					<p>Have spent my life, both interest and principal,</p>
					<p>And deem not, what I deemed—my soul invincible.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXIV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>No more—no more—Oh! never more on me</p>
					<p class="i2">The freshness of the heart can fall like dew,</p>
					<p>Which out of all the lovely things we see</p>
					<p class="i2">Extracts emotions beautiful and new,</p>
					<p>Hived<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_89">[89]</a> in our bosoms like the bag o' the bee.</p>
					<p class="i2">Think'st thou the honey with those objects grew?</p>
					<p>Alas! 't was not in them, but in thy power</p>
					<p>To double even the sweetness of a flower.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXV.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>No more—no more—Oh! never more, my heart,</p>
					<p class="i2">Canst thou be my sole world, my universe!</p>
					<p>Once all in all, but now a thing apart,</p>
					<p class="i2">Thou canst not be my blessing or my curse:</p>
					<p>The illusion's gone for ever, and thou art</p>
					<p class="i2">Insensible, I trust, but none the worse,</p>
					<p>And in thy stead I've got a deal of judgment,</p>
					<p>Though Heaven knows how it ever found a lodgment.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXVI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>My days of love are over; me no more<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_90">[90]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">The charms of maid, wife, and still less of widow,</p>
					<p>Can make the fool of which they made before,—</p>
					<p class="i2">In short, I must not lead the life I did do;</p>
					<p>The credulous hope of mutual minds is o'er,</p>
					<p class="i2">The copious use of claret is forbid too,</p>
					<p>So for a good old-gentlemanly vice,</p>
					<p>I think I must take up with avarice.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXVII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>Ambition was my idol, which was broken</p>
					<p class="i2">Before the shrines of Sorrow, and of Pleasure;</p>
					<p>And the two last have left me many a token</p>
					<p class="i2">O'er which reflection may be made at leisure:</p>
					<p>Now, like Friar Bacon's Brazen Head, I've spoken,</p>
					<p class="i2">"Time is, Time was, Time's past:"<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_91">[91]</a>—a chymic treasure</p>
					<p>Is glittering Youth, which I have spent betimes—</p>
					<p>My heart in passion, and my head on rhymes.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXVIII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What is the end of Fame? 't is but to fill</p>
					<p class="i2">A certain portion of uncertain paper:</p>
					<p>Some liken it to climbing up a hill,</p>
					<p class="i2">Whose summit, like all hills, is lost in vapour;<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_92">[92]</a></p>
					<p>For this men write, speak, preach, and heroes kill,</p>
					<p class="i2">And bards burn what they call their "midnight taper,"</p>
					<p>To have, when the original is dust,</p>
					<p>A name, a wretched picture and worse bust.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AW">[AW]</a><a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_93">[93]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXIX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>What are the hopes of man? Old Egypt's King</p>
					<p class="i2">Cheops erected the first Pyramid</p>
					<p>And largest, thinking it was just the thing</p>
					<p class="i2">To keep his memory whole, and mummy hid;</p>
					<p>But somebody or other rummaging,</p>
					<p class="i2">Burglariously broke his coffin's lid:</p>
					<p>Let not a monument give you or me hopes,</p>
					<p>Since not a pinch of dust remains of Cheops.<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_94">[94]</a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXX.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But I, being fond of true philosophy,</p>
					<p class="i2">Say very often to myself, "Alas!</p>
					<p>All things that have been born were born to die,</p>
					<p class="i2">And flesh (which Death mows down to hay) is grass;</p>
					<p>You've passed your youth not so unpleasantly,</p>
					<p class="i2">And if you had it o'er again—'t would pass—</p>
					<p>So thank your stars that matters are no worse,</p>
					<p>And read your Bible, sir, and mind your purse."</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXXI.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>But for the present, gentle reader! and</p>
					<p class="i2">Still gentler purchaser! the Bard—that's I—</p>
					<p>Must, with permission, shake you by the hand,<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_AX">[AX]</a></p>
					<p class="i2">And so—"your humble servant, and Good-bye!"</p>
					<p>We meet again, if we should understand</p>
					<p class="i2">Each other; and if not, I shall not try</p>
					<p>Your patience further than by this short sample—</p>
					<p>'T were well if others followed my example.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<h3>CCXXII.</h3>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<p>"Go, little Book, from this my solitude!</p>
					<p class="i2">I cast thee on the waters—go thy ways!</p>
					<p>And if, as I believe, thy vein be good,</p>
					<p class="i2">The World will find thee after many days."<a class="fnanchor pginternal" href="#Footnote_95">[95]</a></p>
					<p>When Southey's read, and Wordsworth understood,</p>
					<p class="i2">I can't help putting in my claim to praise—</p>
					<p>The four first rhymes are Southey's every line:</p>
					<p>For God's sake, reader! take them not for mine.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>Nov. 1, 1818.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
