<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Dedication</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="dedication" epub:type="dedication z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Dedication<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a></h2>
			<section id="dedication-1">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Bob Southey! You’re a poet⁠—Poet-laureate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And representative of all the race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Although ’tis true that you turned out a Tory at</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Last⁠—yours has lately been a common case;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And now, my Epic Renegade! what are ye at?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With all the Lakers, in and out of place?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A nest of tuneful persons, to my eye</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Like “four and twenty Blackbirds in a pye;</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-2">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>“Which pye being opened they began to sing,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(This old song and new simile holds good),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“A dainty dish to set before the King,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or Regent, who admires such kind of food;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Coleridge, too, has lately taken wing,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">But like a hawk encumbered with his hood⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Explaining Metaphysics to the nation⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish he would explain his Explanation.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-3">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>You, Bob! are rather insolent, you know,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">At being disappointed in your wish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To supersede all warblers here below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And be the only Blackbird in the dish;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And then you overstrain yourself, or so,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And tumble downward like the flying fish</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Gasping on deck, because you soar too high, Bob,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And fall, for lack of moisture, quite a-dry, Bob!<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-4">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>And Wordsworth, in a rather long “Excursion,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(I think the quarto holds five hundred pages),</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has given a sample from the vasty version</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of his new system<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-13" id="noteref-13" epub:type="noteref">13</a> to perplex the sages;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis poetry-at least by his assertion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And may appear so when the dog-star rages⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he who understands it would be able</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To add a story to the Tower of Babel.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-5">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>You⁠—Gentlemen! by dint of long seclusion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From better company, have kept your own</span>
					<br/>
					<span>At Keswick, and, through still continued fusion</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of one another’s minds, at last have grown</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To deem as a most logical conclusion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">That Poesy has wreaths for you alone:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There is a narrowness in such a notion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Which makes me wish you’d change your lakes for Ocean.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-6">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>I would not imitate the petty thought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor coin my self-love to so base a vice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For all the glory your conversion brought,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Since gold alone should not have been its price.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You have your salary; was ’t for that you wrought?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And Wordsworth has his place in the Excise.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-14" id="noteref-14" epub:type="noteref">14</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>You’re shabby fellows⁠—true⁠—but poets still,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And duly seated on the Immortal Hill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-7">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Your bays may hide the baldness of your brows⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Perhaps some virtuous blushes;⁠—let them go⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To you I envy neither fruit nor boughs⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And for the fame you would engross below,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The field is universal, and allows</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Scope to all such as feel the inherent glow:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Scott, Rogers, Campbell, Moore, and Crabbe, will try</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Gainst you the question with posterity.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-8">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>For me, who, wandering with pedestrian Muses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Contend not with you on the wingéd steed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I wish your fate may yield ye, when she chooses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The fame you envy, and the skill you need;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, recollect, a poet nothing loses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In giving to his brethren their full meed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of merit⁠—and complaint of present days</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is not the certain path to future praise.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-9">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>He that reserves his laurels for posterity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">(Who does not often claim the bright reversion)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Has generally no great crop to spare it, he</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Being only injured by his own assertion;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And although here and there some glorious rarity</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Arise like Titan from the sea’s immersion,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The major part of such appellants go</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To⁠—God knows where⁠—for no one else can know.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-10">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If, fallen in evil days on evil tongues,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-15" id="noteref-15" epub:type="noteref">15</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Milton appealed to the Avenger, Time,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If Time, the Avenger, execrates his wrongs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And makes the word “Miltonic” mean “<em>Sublime</em>,”</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>He</em> deigned not to belie his soul in songs,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor turn his very talent to a crime;</span>
					<br/>
					<span><em>He</em> did not loathe the Sire to laud the Son,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But closed the tyrant-hater he begun.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-11">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Think’st thou, could he⁠—the blind Old Man⁠—arise</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like Samuel from the grave, to freeze once more</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The blood of monarchs with his prophecies,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Or be alive again⁠—again all hoar</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With time and trials, and those helpless eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And heartless daughters⁠—worn⁠—and pale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-16" id="noteref-16" epub:type="noteref">16</a>⁠—and poor;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Would <em>he</em> adore a sultan? <em>he</em> obey</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The intellectual eunuch Castlereagh?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-12">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Cold-blooded, smooth-faced, placid miscreant!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Dabbling its sleek young hands in Erin’s gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And thus for wider carnage taught to pant,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Transferred to gorge upon a sister shore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The vulgarest tool that Tyranny could want,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">With just enough of talent, and no more,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To lengthen fetters by another fixed,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And offer poison long already mixed.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-13">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>An orator of such set trash of phrase</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ineffably⁠—legitimately vile,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That even its grossest flatterers dare not praise,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Nor foes⁠—all nations⁠—condescend to smile⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Nor even a sprightly blunder’s spark can blaze</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From that Ixion grindstone’s ceaseless toil,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That turns and turns to give the world a notion</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of endless torments and perpetual motion.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-14">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>A bungler even in its disgusting trade,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And botching, patching, leaving still behind</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Something of which its masters are afraid⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">States to be curbed, and thoughts to be confined,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Conspiracy or Congress to be made⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Cobbling at manacles for all mankind⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A tinkering slave-maker, who mends old chains,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With God and Man’s abhorrence for its gains.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-15">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>If we may judge of matter by the mind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Emasculated to the marrow <em>It</em></span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hath but two objects, how to serve, and bind,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Deeming the chain it wears even men may fit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Eutropius of its many masters,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a>⁠—blind</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To worth as freedom, wisdom as to wit,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fearless⁠—because <em>no</em> feeling dwells in ice,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Its very courage stagnates to a vice.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-19" id="noteref-19" epub:type="noteref">19</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-16">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Where shall I turn me not to <em>view</em> its bonds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">For I will never <em>feel</em> them?⁠—Italy!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy late reviving Roman soul desponds</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Beneath the lie this State-thing breathed o’er thee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-20" id="noteref-20" epub:type="noteref">20</a>⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy clanking chain, and Erin’s yet green wounds,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Have voices⁠—tongues to cry aloud for me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Europe has slaves⁠—allies⁠—kings⁠—armies still⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And Southey lives to sing them very ill.</span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<section id="dedication-17">
				<header>
					<p epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</p>
				</header>
				<p>
					<span>Meantime, Sir Laureate, I proceed to dedicate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">In honest simple verse, this song to you.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And, if in flattering strains I do not predicate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">’Tis that I still retain my “buff and blue;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-21" id="noteref-21" epub:type="noteref">21</a></span>
					<br/>
					<span>My politics as yet are all to educate:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Apostasy’s so fashionable, too,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To keep <em>one</em> creed’s a task grown quite Herculean;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Is it not so, my Tory, ultra-Julian?<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-22" id="noteref-22" epub:type="noteref">22</a></span>
				</p>
			</section>
			<footer>
				<p>Venice, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 16, 1818.</p>
			</footer>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
