<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="introduction" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Introduction</h2>
			<p>Byron was a rapid as well as a voluminous writer. His <i epub:type="se:name.publication">Tales</i> were thrown off at lightning speed, and even his dramas were thought out and worked through with unhesitating energy and rapid achievement. Nevertheless, the composition of his two great poems was all but coextensive with his poetical life. He began the first canto of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Childe Harold</i> in the autumn of 1809, and he did not complete the fourth canto till the spring of 1818. He began the first canto of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> in the autumn of 1818, and he was still at work on a seventeenth canto in the spring of 1823. Both poems were issued in parts, and with long intervals of unequal duration between the parts; but the same result was brought about by different causes and produced a dissimilar effect. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Childe Harold</i> consists of three distinct poems descriptive of three successive travels or journeys in foreign lands. The adventures of the hero are but the pretext for the shifting of the diorama; whereas in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> the story is continuous, and the scenery is exhibited as a background for the dramatic evolution of the personality of the hero. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Childe Harold</i> came out at intervals, because there were periods when the author was stationary; but the interruptions in the composition and publication of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> were due to the disapproval and discouragement of friends, and the very natural hesitation and procrastination of the publisher. Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> was written in September, 1818; Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in December-January, 1818⁠–⁠1819. Both cantos were published on July 15, 1819. Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> were written in the winter of 1819⁠–⁠1820; Canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, after an interval of nine months, in October-November, 1820, but the publication of Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> was delayed till August 8, 1821. The next interval was longer still, but it was the last. In June, 1822, Byron began to work at a sixth, and by the end of March, 1823, he had completed a sixteenth canto. But the publication of these later cantos, which had been declined by Murray, and were finally entrusted to John Hunt, was spread over a period of several months. Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, with a Preface, were published July 15; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, August 29; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, December 17, 1823; and, finally, Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, March 26, 1824. The composition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>, considered as a whole, synchronized with the composition of all the dramas (except <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Manfred</i>) and the following poems: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Prophecy of Dante</i>, (the translation of) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Morgante Maggiore</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Vision of Judgment</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Age of Bronze</i>, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Island</i>.</p>
			<p>There is little to be said with regard to the “Sources” of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>. Frere’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Whistlecraft</i> had suggested <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Beppo</i>, and, at the same time, had prompted and provoked a sympathetic study of Frere’s Italian models, Berni and Pulci (see “Introduction to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Beppo</i>,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poetical Works</i>, 1901, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 155⁠–⁠158; and “Introduction to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Morgante Maggiore</i>” ibid., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 279⁠–⁠281); and, again, the success of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Beppo</i>, and, still more, a sense of inspiration and the conviction that he had found the path to excellence, suggested another essay of the <i xml:lang="it">ottava rima</i>, a humorous poem “<i xml:lang="fr">à la Beppo</i>” on a larger and more important scale. If Byron possessed more than a superficial knowledge of the legendary “Don Juan,” he was irresponsive and unimpressed. He speaks (letter to Murray, February 16, 1821) of “the Spanish tradition;” but there is nothing to show that he had read or heard of Tirso de Molina’s (Gabriel Tellez) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="es">El Burlador de Sevilla y Convidado de Piedra</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Deceiver of Seville and the Stone Guest</i>), 1626, which dramatized the “ower true tale” of the actual Don Juan Tenorio; or that he was acquainted with any of the Italian (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="it">Convitato di Pietra</i>, del Dottor Giacinto Andrea Cicognini, Fiorentino [see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Allacci <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="it">Dramaturgia</i>, 1755, 4º, <abbr>p.</abbr> 862]) or French adaptations of the legend (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">e.g.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="fr">Le Festin de Pierre, ou le fils criminel</i>, Tragi-comédie de De Villiers, 1659; and Molière’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="fr">Dom Juan, ou Le Festin de Pierre</i>, 1665). He had seen (<i xml:lang="la">vide post</i>, <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-24">note 24</a>) Delpini’s pantomime, which was based on Shadwell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Libertine</i>, and he may have witnessed, at Milan or Venice, a performance of Mozart’s <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Don Giovanni</i>; but in taking Don Juan for his “hero,” he took the name only, and disregarded the “terrible figure” “of the Titan of embodied evil, the likeness of sin made flesh” (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Selections from the Works of Lord Byron</i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Swinburne, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>), “as something to his purpose nothing”!</p>
			<p>Why, then, did he choose the name, and what was the scheme or motif of his poem? Something is to be gathered from his own remarks and reflections; but it must be borne in mind that he is on the defensive, and that his half-humorous paradoxes were provoked by advice and opposition. Writing to Moore (September 19, 1818), he says, “I have finished the first canto⁠ ⁠… of a poem in the style and manner of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Beppo</i>, encouraged by the good success of the same. It is⁠ ⁠… meant to be a little quietly facetious upon everything. But I doubt whether it is not⁠—at least as far as it has gone⁠—too free for these very modest days.” The critics before and after publication thought that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> <em>was</em> “too free,” and, a month after the two first cantos had been issued, he writes to Murray (August 12, 1819), “You ask me for the plan of Donny Johnny; I <em>have</em> no plan⁠—I <em>had</em> no plan; but I had or have materials.⁠ ⁠… You are too earnest and eager about a work never intended to be serious. Do you suppose that I could have any intention but to giggle and make giggle?⁠—a playful satire, with as little poetry as could be helped, was what I meant.” Again, after the completion but before the publication of Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, in a letter to Murray (February 16, 1821), he writes, “The Fifth is so far from being the last of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>, that it is hardly the beginning. I meant to take him the tour of Europe, with a proper mixture of siege, battle, and adventure, and to make him finish as Anacharsis Cloots in the French Revolution.⁠ ⁠… I meant to have made him a <i xml:lang="it">Cavalier Servente</i> in Italy, and a cause for a divorce in England, and a Sentimental ‘Werther-faced’ man in Germany, so as to show the different ridicules of the society in each of these countries, and to have displayed him gradually <i xml:lang="fr">gâté</i> and blasé, as he grew older, as is natural. But I had not quite fixed whether to make him end in Hell, or in an unhappy marriage, not knowing which would be the severest.”</p>
			<p>Byron meant what he said, but he kept back the larger truth. Great works, in which the poet speaks <i xml:lang="la">ex animo</i>, and the man lays bare the very pulse of the machine, are not conceived or composed unconsciously and at haphazard. Byron did not “whistle” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> “for want of thought.” He had found a thing to say, and he meant to make the world listen. He had read with angry disapproval, but he had read, Coleridge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Critique on <em>[Maturin’s]</em> Bertram</i> (<i xml:lang="la">vide post</i>, <a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11">note 11</a>), and, it may be, had caught an inspiration from one brilliant sentence which depicts the Don Juan of the legend somewhat after the likeness of Childe Harold, if not of Lord Byron: “Rank, fortune, wit, talent, acquired knowledge, and liberal accomplishments, with beauty of person, vigorous health,⁠ ⁠… all these advantages, elevated by the habits and sympathies of noble birth and natural character, are⁠ ⁠… combined in Don Juan, so as to give him the means of carrying into all its practical consequences the doctrine of a godless nature⁠ ⁠… Obedience to nature is the only virtue.” Again, “It is not the wickedness of Don Juan⁠ ⁠… which constitutes the character an abstraction,⁠ ⁠… but the rapid succession of the correspondent acts and incidents, his intellectual superiority, and the splendid accumulation of his gifts and desirable qualities as coexistent with entire wickedness in one and the same person.” Here was at once a suggestion and a challenge.</p>
			<p>Would it not be possible to conceive and to depict an ideal character, gifted, gracious, and delightful, who should “carry into all its practical consequences” the doctrine of a mundane, if not godless doctrine, and, at the same time, retain the charities and virtues of uncelestial but not devilish manhood? In defiance of monition and in spite of resolution, the primrose path is trodden by all sorts and conditions of men, sinners no doubt, but not necessarily abstractions of sin, and to assert the contrary makes for cant and not for righteousness. The form and substance of the poem were due to the compulsion of Genius and the determination of Art, but the argument is a vindication of the natural man. It is Byron’s “criticism of life.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> was <em>taboo</em> from the first. The earlier issues of the first five cantos were doubly anonymous. Neither author nor publisher subscribed their names on the title-page. The book was a monster, and, as its maker had foreseen, “all the world” shuddered. Immoral, in the sense that it advocates immoral tenets, or prefers evil to good, it is not, but it is unquestionably a dangerous book, which (to quote Kingsley’s words used in another connection) “the young and innocent will do well to leave altogether unread.” It is dangerous because it ignores resistance and presumes submission to passion; it is dangerous because, as Byron admitted, it is “now and then voluptuous;” and it is dangerous, in a lesser degree, because, here and there, the purport of the quips and allusions is gross and offensive. No one can take up the book without being struck and arrested by these violations of modesty and decorum; but no one can master its contents and become possessed of it as a whole without perceiving that the mirror is held up to nature, that it reflects spots and blemishes which, on a survey of the vast and various orb, dwindle into <em>natural</em> and so comparative insignificance. Byron was under no delusion as to the grossness of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>. His plea or pretence, that he was sheltered by the superior grossness of Ariosto and La Fontaine, of Prior and of Fielding, is <i xml:lang="la">nihil ad rem</i>, if it is not insincere. When Murray (May 3, 1819) charges him with “approximations to indelicacy,” he laughs himself away at the euphemism, but when Hobhouse and “the Zoili of Albemarle Street” talked to him “about morality,” he flames out, “I maintain that it is the most moral of poems.” He looked upon his great work as a whole, and he knew that the “<i xml:lang="fr">raison d’être</i> of his song” was not only to celebrate, but, by the white light of truth, to represent and exhibit the great things of the world⁠—Love and War, and Death by sea and land, and Man, half-angel, half-demon⁠—the comedy of his fortunes, and the tragedy of his passions and his fate.</p>
			<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> has won great praise from the great. Sir Walter Scott (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Edinburgh Weekly Journal</i>, May 19, 1824) maintained that its creator “has embraced every topic of human life, and sounded every string of the divine harp, from its slightest to its most powerful and heart-astounding tones.” Goethe (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Kunst und Alterthum</i>, 1821 [<abbr>ed.</abbr> Weimar, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> 197, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Sämmtliche Werke</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> 637]) described <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> as “a work of boundless genius.” Shelley (letter to Byron, October 21, 1821), on the receipt of Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, bore testimony to his “wonder and delight:” “This poem carries with it at once the stamp of originality and defiance of imitation. Nothing has ever been written like it in English, nor, if I may venture to prophesy, will there be, unless carrying upon it the mark of a secondary and borrowed light.⁠ ⁠… You are building up a drama,” he adds, “such as England has not yet seen, and the task is sufficiently noble and worthy of you.” Again, of the fifth canto he writes (Shelley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Prose Works</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Buxton Forman, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> 219), “Every word has the stamp of immortality.⁠ ⁠… It fulfils, in a certain degree, what I have long preached of producing⁠—something wholly new and relative to the age, and yet surpassingly beautiful.” Finally, a living poet, neither a disciple nor encomiast of Byron, pays eloquent tribute to the strength and splendour of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>: “Across the stanzas⁠ ⁠… we swim forward as over the ‘broad backs of the sea;’ they break and glitter, hiss and laugh, murmur and move like waves that sound or that subside. There is in them a delicious resistance, an elastic motion, which salt water has and fresh water has not. There is about them a wide wholesome air, full of vivid light and constant wind, which is only felt at sea. Life undulates and Death palpitates in the splendid verse.⁠ ⁠… This gift of life and variety is the supreme quality of Byron’s chief poem” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Selection, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Swinburne, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>).</p>
			<p>Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i> were reviewed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine</i>, August, 1819, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 512⁠–⁠518; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, August, 1821, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 107⁠–⁠115; and Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, July, 1823, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 88⁠–⁠92: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">British Critic</i>, Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> were reviewed August, 1819, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 195⁠–⁠205; and Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, September, 1821, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 251⁠–⁠256: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">British Review</i>, Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> were reviewed August, 1819, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 266⁠–⁠268; and Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, December, 1821, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 245⁠–⁠265: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Examiner</i>, Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> were reviewed October 31, 1819; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, August 26, 1821; and Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, March 14 and 21, 1824: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Literary Gazette</i>, Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> were reviewed July 17 and 24, 1819; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, August 11 and 18, 1821; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, July 19, 1823; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, September 6, 1823; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, December 6, 1823; and Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, April 3, 1824: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Monthly Review</i>, Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> were reviewed July, 1819, Enlarged Series, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 89, <abbr>p.</abbr> 309; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>, August, 1821, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 95, <abbr>p.</abbr> 418; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, July, 1823, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 101, <abbr>p.</abbr> 316; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, October, 1823, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 102, <abbr>p.</abbr> 217; Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 103, <abbr>p.</abbr> 212; and Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>, April, 1824, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 103, <abbr>p.</abbr> 434: in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">New Monthly Magazine</i>, Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> were reviewed August, 1819, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 75. See, too, an article on the “Morality of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Dublin University Magazine</i>, May, 1875, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXV</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 630⁠–⁠637.</p>
			<p>Neither the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Quarterly</i> nor the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Edinburgh Review</i> devoted separate articles to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>; but Heber, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Quarterly Review</i> (Lord Byron’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dramas</i>), July, 1822, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 477, and Jeffrey, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Edinburgh Review</i> (Lord Byron’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tragedies</i>), February, 1822, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 36, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 446⁠–⁠450, took occasion to pass judgment on the poem and its author.</p>
			<p>For the history of the legend, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Spanish Literature</i>, by George Ticknor, 1888, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 380, 381; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="de">Das Kloster</i>, von <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Scheible, 1846, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 663⁠–⁠765. See, too, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Notes sur le Don Juanisme</i>, par Henri de Bruchard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Mercure de France</i>, Avril, 1898, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58⁠–⁠73; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Don Juan</i>, par Gustave Kahn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Revue Encyclopédique</i>, 1898, <abbr>tom.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 326⁠–⁠329.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
