<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface to Cantos VI, VII, and VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Preface to Cantos <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span></h2>
			<p>The details of the siege of Ismail in two of the following cantos (<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr></i> the seventh and eighth) are taken from a French Work, entitled <i>Histoire de la Nouvelle Russie.</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> Some of the incidents attributed to Don Juan really occurred, particularly the circumstance of his saving the infant, which was the actual case of the late Duc de Richelieu, then a young volunteer in the Russian service, and afterward the founder and benefactor of Odessa, where his name and memory can never cease to be regarded with reverence.</p>
			<p>In the course of these cantos, a stanza or two will be found relative to the late Marquis of Londonderry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> but written some time before his decease. Had that person’s oligarchy died with him, they would have been suppressed; as it is, I am aware of nothing in the manner of his death or of his life to prevent the free expression of the opinions of all whom his whole existence was consumed in endeavouring to enslave. That he was an amiable man in <i>private</i> life, may or may not be true: but with this the public have nothing to do; and as to lamenting his death, it will be time enough when Ireland has ceased to mourn for his birth. As a minister, I, for one of millions, looked upon him as the most despotic in intention, and the weakest in intellect, that ever tyrannised over a country. It is the first time indeed since the Normans that England has been insulted by a <i>minister</i> (at least) who could not speak English, and that Parliament permitted itself to be dictated to in the language of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Malaprop.</p>
			<p>Of the manner of his death little need be said, except that if a poor radical, such as Waddington or Watson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> had cut his throat, he would have been buried in a cross-road, with the usual appurtenances of the stake and mallet. But the minister was an elegant lunatic⁠—a sentimental suicide⁠—he merely cut the “carotid artery,” (blessings on their learning!) and lo! the pageant, and the Abbey! and “the syllables of dolour yelled forth”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> by the newspapers⁠—and the harangue of the Coroner in a eulogy over the bleeding body of the deceased⁠—(an Anthony worthy of such a Cæsar)⁠—and the nauseous and atrocious cant of a degraded crew of conspirators against all that is sincere and honourable. In his death he was necessarily one of two things by the law<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a>⁠—a felon or a madman⁠—and in either case no great subject for panegyric.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> In his life he was⁠—what all the world knows, and half of it will feel for years to come, unless his death prove a “moral lesson” to the surviving Sejani<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> of Europe. It may at least serve as some consolation to the nations, that their oppressors are not happy, and in some instances judge so justly of their own actions as to anticipate the sentence of mankind. Let us hear no more of this man; and let Ireland remove the ashes of her Grattan from the sanctuary of Westminster. Shall the patriot of humanity repose by the Werther of politics!!!</p>
			<p>With regard to the objections which have been made on another score to the already published cantos of this poem, I shall content myself with two quotations from Voltaire:⁠—“La pudeur s’est enfuite des coeurs, et s’est refugiée sur les lèvres.”⁠ ⁠… “Plus les moeurs sont dépravés, plus les expressions deviennent mesurées; on croit regagner en langage ce qu’on a perdu en vertu.”</p>
			<p>This is the real fact, as applicable to the degraded and hypocritical mass which leavens the present English generation, and is the only answer they deserve. The hackneyed and lavished title of Blasphemer⁠—which, with Radical, Liberal, Jacobin, Reformer, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, are the changes which the hirelings are daily ringing in the ears of those who will listen⁠—should be welcome to all who recollect on <i>whom</i> it was originally bestowed. Socrates and Jesus Christ were put to death publicly as <i>blasphemers</i>, and so have been and may be many who dare to oppose the most notorious abuses of the name of God and the mind of man. But persecution is not refutation, nor even triumph: the “wretched infidel,” as he is called, is probably happier in his prison than the proudest of his assailants. With his opinions I have nothing to do⁠—they may be right or wrong⁠—but he has suffered for them, and that very suffering for conscience’ sake will make more proselytes to deism than the example of heterodox<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> Prelates to Christianity, suicide statesmen to oppression, or overpensioned homicides to the impious alliance which insults the world with the name of “Holy!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> I have no wish to trample on the dishonoured or the dead; but it would be well if the adherents to the classes from whence those persons sprung should abate a little of the cant which is the crying sin of this double-dealing and false-speaking time of selfish spoilers, and⁠—but enough for the present.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
